 Click here for interactive map of Battleground BritainClick through for an overview of the key issues in each constituency, ABERAVONAberavon's chief claim to political fame was that it was represented by Ramsay MacDonald who, in 1924, became Labour's first Prime Minister, causing King George V to write in his diary "Today 23 years ago dear Grandmama (Queen Victoria) died. I wonder what she would have thought of a Labour Government!" In 1931, his second term of office, he was compelled to form a National Government in which a majority of MPs were from the Conservatives. As a result he was expelled from the Labour Party which accused him of "betrayal". Aberavon is a Labour stronghold. It boasts one of Wales's longest Blue Flag beaches and is regarded as a surfing "hot spot" all the year round.ABERCONWYAberconwy is a new seat which comprises parts of the old seats of Conwy (Labour held) and Meirionnydd Nant Conwy (Plaid Cymru). It includes the holiday resort of Llandudno regarded as a Conservative area, but excludes Bangor, seen as a Labour stronghold which was part of the old Conwy constituency. The new seat has a diverse population of Welsh-speakers in the rural areas and English-speakers along the coast. Plaid won the new seat in the 2007 Welsh Assembly election but on past form in the old constituency it should be a Labour-Tory fight in the Westminster election.ABERDEEN NORTHAberdeen North, a Labour-held seat, was once represented at Westminster by William Wedgwood Benn, who became the first Lord Stansgate. He was the father of Tony Benn. Although Labour won comfortably in 2005, the Liberal Democrats and Scottish Nationalist were neck and neck for second and third places. The traditionally Labour end of the so-called Granite City is currently the party’s most northerly Commons constituency in the UK. ABERDEEN SOUTHAberdeen South is situated on both sides of the river Dee in Aberdeen's affluent suburbs, and is more middle class than its northern neighbour. Labour's Anne Begg, the current MP, who won the seat from the Tories in 1997, was the first full time wheelchair user to be elected to the Commons. Aberdeen South was the only seat in Scotland that Labour lost in 1992.ABERDEENSHIRE WEST AND KINCARDINEThis constituency includes Balmoral, reportedly the Queen's favourite "home" north of the border. It has been represented by Liberal Democrat Robert Smith since 1997, with the Conservatives the main challengers. AIRDRIE AND SHOTTSAirdrie and Shotts, a Labour stronghold, was until recently represented by Helen Liddell, nicknamed "Stalin's Granny". She served for a time as Scottish Secretary and subsequently as Governor General of Australia. Since her departure, the seat has been represented by former Home Secretary John Reid.ALDERSHOTAldershot, known as "the home of the British army" has been a garrison town since the Crimean War. The notorious highway robber Dick Turpin used to operate in the area. Aldershot is Tory-held, the sitting MP being Gerald Howarth, a close confidant of Margaret Thatcher.ALDRIDGE-BROWNHILLSThis seat is one of acute contrasts. Aldridge is an affluent and highly Conservative dormitory town comprising a middle-class suburbia while Brownhills to the North of the constituency is a former coal mining town which tends to vote Labour. The Tories won the seat in 1979 and have held it ever since.ALTRINCHAM AND SALE WESTThis seat, although subject to minor boundary changes, has been since 2001 the only constituency held by the Tories in Greater Manchester, even though most of the constituency still has a postal address of Cheshire. It comprises some of the wealthiest suburbs of Greater Manchester, including Hale and Bowden.ALYN AND DEESIDEThis constituency, geographically one of the smallest in Wales, contains Connah`s Quay power station, the Corus steel plant, the Toyota Engine factory and BAE Systems in Broughton where the wings for the new Airbus A380 are manufactured. The constituency was created in 1983 and has always, so far, returned a Labour MP. Gladstone lived in this area for a time at his wife's family's estate in Hawarden. He donated his 32,000 books to the St Deiniol's Library, Hawarden, hauling most of them himself, at the age of 85, the quarter-of-a-mile from his home to the library in a wheelbarrow.  AMBER VALLEYThis is a marginal seat, between Labour and Conservative, at present held by Labour. It includes the market towns of Alfreton, Heanor and Ripley, all of which are favourable to Labour. However the constituency also has a considerable rural /suburban element, stretching from the edge of the Peak District to the northern edge of Derby itself, which is more promising territory for the Conservatives. The constituency was used as the setting for the ITV drama series Peak Practice.ANGUSAngus, a marginal seat, is held by the Scottish Nationalists with the Conservatives hot on their heels. The county of Angus is known as Scotland's Birthplace, having played a central role in the history and formation of the Scottish nation, when the Declaration of Arbroath was signed in 1320.ANTRIM EASTThe Democratic Unionist Party wrenched this seat from the Ulster Unionists in 2005. The constituency is overwhelmingly unionist, with the combined votes for nationalist parties rarely exceeding 10%. It stretches along the coastal strip on the northern side of Belfast Lough and the western side of the North Channel.ANTRIM NORTHDr Ian Paisley, the founder and former leader of the Democratic Unionist Party - which over a period of years has effectively destroyed the political influence of the official Unionists - has held this seat since 1970, first as a Protestant Unionist before the birth of the DUP. This is the longest continuous period for which the current holding party has held any Northern Irish seat in elections at all levels. This largely rural seat includes the famous Giant's Causeway.ANTRIM SOUTHThis constituency, on wider boundaries, once had the strongest vote for the Ulster Unionist Party anywhere in Northern Ireland. In the 1979 general election James Molyneaux, the one-time Ulster Unionist leader, had the largest majority (38,868) of any MP in the entire United Kingdom. The current MP is Democratic Unionist William McCrea, a minister of Magherafelt Free Presbyterian Church. He has made numerous gospel albums and as a result has been nicknamed "The Singing Nun".ARFONThis is a new - or rather revived - constituency based on the north Wales towns of Bangor and Caernarfon. "Arfon" is a historical name for the area, meaning "facing Anglesey". It was formerly a constituency, existing from 1885 to 1918 when it was abolished. It is expected to be a battle for supremacy between Labour and Plaid Cymru although the nationalists easily won it in the 2007 Welsh Assembly election.ARGYLL AND BUTEAfter the 2001 general election, this constituency was the only four-way marginal in the nation, with just a few hundred votes separating the Liberal Democrats (the winners), the Conservatives, Labour and the Scottish Nationalists. In 2005, the Liberal Democrats increased their majority, but the seat remains wide open for any of those four parties to win it at the next election. At one time it was traditionally the last result declared as steamers had to bring in the ballot boxes from outlying islands but they have now been replaced by helicopters.  ARUNDEL AND SOUTH DOWNSThis West Sussex seat is a Tory stronghold which has been described as "rich, rural and retired". It came into the news just before the 2005 general election when the sitting MP, Tory Howard Flight, a City expert, was banned from standing after making remarks, secretly recorded, about the Conservatives' plans to cut public spending. ASHFIELDAshfield, on the edge of Sherwood Forest, has been represented since 1992 by Labour's Geoff Hoon, who has held several Cabinet posts, including Defence Secretary, Transport Secretary and Leader of the Commons. He was born in Derby but avoids boasting in his website of his all-consuming support for Derby County, a club detested by all football fans in Nottinghamshire where his constituency lies. D H Lawrence and Lord Byron were both famous sons of Ashfield. It was the scene of a shock Tory by-election gain in 1977 – one of the greatest upsets of all time – but reverted to Labour in 1979. ASHFORDThe sitting MP Tory front-bencher Damian Green became the centre of a massive storm in 2008 when he was arrested by the Metropolitan Police at his constituency home on suspicion of "aiding and abetting misconduct in public office" and "conspiring to commit misconduct in a public office". His office at Westminster was searched by the police, and the House of Commons authorities, notably the then Speaker Michael Martin, emerged from the row with their reputations badly tarnished. Ashford, now an integral part of the London-Paris/Brussels high-speed train link, was mentioned in the Domesday Book in 1086 as having one church, two mills and a value of 150 shillings.ASHTON UNDER LYNEThis is - or should be - an impregnable Labour seat. The party has represented the constituency continuously since 1935. This constituency is notable among election buffs as having once produced that rarity, a tie. The Conservative and Liberal candidates each polled 3,049 votes in 1886. Under the then rules, the returning office held the casting vote: he opted for the Conservative. Ashton Market is one of the largest outdoor markets in the United Kingdom. In 2006 IKEA opened what was then the tallest store in the country.AYLESBURYDavid Lidington, who has held the seat since 1992, and had a majority of some 11,000 in 2005, is one of the eggheads of the Tory front bench. He was captain of the Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge team that won the 1978 series of University Challenge. The team returned for the 2002 University Challenge - Reunited "champion of champions" series for the show's 40th anniversary, and they won that too. Aylesbury was once represented by that 18th century radical firebrand John Wilkes, a member of the notorious Hellfire Club whose wild exploits put in the shade the antics of the Bullingdon Club of which David Cameron was a member when up at Oxford.AYR, CARRICK AND CUMNOCKThis constituency, which was created for the 2005 general election, has been described as "a muddled mix" of council estates, affluent middle-class areas, seaside resorts and former mining villages. The sitting MP Blair Babe Sandra Osborne has a Labour majority of almost 10,000 over the Conservatives. In 1997, when she entered Parliament, she became the first-ever Labour MP for the former seat of Ayr. Some Tories continue to complain that the boundary changes to this seat for the 2005 general election seem to have been deliberately drawn to disadvantage the Conservatives. The area has links with King Robert the Bruce who was Earl of Carrick. AYRSHIRE CENTRALThis constituency includes Prestwick International Airport and the golfing "Mecca" of Troon. It is a mixture of former South Ayrshire coalfield territory with some Tory villages. Its sitting MP, Brian Donohoe, entered Parliament in 1992 and is a fervent fan of Coronation Street. He had a Labour majority of over 10,000 in 2005. AYRSHIRE NORTH AND ARRANThis seat has two nuclear power stations, Hunterston A (currently being decommissioned) and Hunterston B as well as a wind farm at Ardrossan.. It is a former mining area, but now relies heavily on tourism. The sitting MP, Labour's Katy Clark, has been described as "stridently left-wing" and voted against the Government on ID cards. She entered Parliament in 2005 as the first MP for this newly created seat.BANBURYThis Tory-held seat covers the towns of Banbury and Bicester, plus many villages in north Oxfordshire. The sitting MP, Tony Baldry, who entered Parliament in 1983, had a majority of nearly 11,000 over Labour last time. Banbury played an important part in the Civil War as a base of operations for Oliver Cromwell, who purportedly planned the Battle of Edge Hill in the back room (which can still be visited) of a local inn, The Reindeer.BANFF AND BUCHANThis seat has been represented at Westminster since 1987 by Alex Salmond, the SNP leader and now First Minister in the Scottish Parliament. The SNP will be defending a majority of nearly 12,000. Mr Salmond is standing down at this election. The seat was last held by the Tories in 1983, and the Conservative candidate, trawlerman Jimmy Buchan (he figured in the BBC series, Trawlermen) would need a 16% swing to oust the SNP, whose candidate this time is Eilidh Whiteford, a former campaign manager for Oxfam and supporter of the Make Poverty History campaign.BARKINGThis busy east London constituency has been represented by Labour ever since 1945 when it was created. It is a seat where the British National Party are extremely active. At the last election the BNP candidate polled 4,916 votes, only 27 fewer than the Conservatives, who were runners up, and over 1,000 more than the Liberal Democrats. Margaret Hodge has represented the seat since 1994, and in 2006 she publicly warned of likely BNP successes in local elections in the area. The extreme right party went on to win 12 seats in Barking and Dagenham Borough – its largest councillors group nationwide. The BNP delivered a bunch of roses to her office to thank her for her "help" in publicising them. And Nick Griffin, the BNP leader, has announced he will be contesting this seat.BARNSLEY CENTRALBarnsley Central, centred on the traditional coalfield town, invariably returns a Labour MP with a massive majority. The present incumbent, Barnsley-born Eric Illsley, described as "active, articulate and well-informed", has represented the seat since 1987. In 2005, he secured 61.1% of the vote. He was one of dozens of MPs alleged by the Daily Telegraph as having made "phantom" claims for council tax on their parliamentary expenses.BARNSLEY EASTThis seat, formerly Barnsley East and Mexborough, is a seemingly impregnable Labour stronghold. At the last election, the sitting MP Jeff Ennis secured a massive 62.9% of the poll, with a 14,000 majority over the Liberal Democrats. The constituency includes Grimethorpe - where Ennis was born - famous for its colliery brass band. This former mining area is one of the safest Labour seats in the United Kingdom. "It is my aim to keep it that way," Mr Ennis said.BARROW AND FURNESSThis constituency includes the site of the BAE Systems nuclear submarine and ship building operation. This reliance on a single industry associated with controversial defence policies has, in the past, proved politically volatile in a constituency the Labour Party would consider its own backyard. But there are other industries, including engineering and chemicals. More than a quarter of all jobs are in manufacturing. Surrounding this industrial mass is some wild and beautiful countryside, described as "a sweeping mix of moors, hills, peaks and coast". John Hutton, former Defence Secretary, who secured a Labour majority of 6,000 over the Conservatives at the last election is not standing at this one.BASILDON AND BILLERICAYThis new seat merges the existing constituency of Billericay with most of the former Basildon constituency. Ever since 1974, the party which won the bellwether seat of Basildon has commanded a majority in the House of Commons. This is an "Essex man" constituency with much of its population having originated in London's East End. However, the betting fraternity are putting their money on a Tory victory here: At the last election, the Conservatives held Billericay with a large majority and Labour won Basildon with a narrow majority.BASILDON SOUTH AND THURROCK EASTThis is a new seat which is expected to be highly marginal. Experts calculated that if it had existed at the last election, Labour would have won it, but with a majority under 1,000. The principal town is Pitsea which was once favoured as the name of the new constituency, but the idea was rejected. Pitsea boasts one of the biggest Tesco stores in the country.BASINGSTOKE Basingstoke has elected Conservative MPs at every election since 1923. The town was represented in the Model Parliament of 1295, but did not reappear as a constituency for nearly 600 years. Basingstoke is a country market town that has outgrown its roots with new industry including electronics, finance and computers. It has, incidentally, more street spy cameras per member of the population than New York and is known as "Doughnut City" because of the number of roundabouts. The sitting MP Maria Miller was elected in 2005 and has served as a shadow children's minister.BASSETLAWBassetlaw, in north Nottinghamshire, has had only three MPs since 1935, all of them Labour. Before them, the MP Malcolm MacDonald served as Labour and then National Labour between 1929 and 1935. He was one of the few Labour MPs to join his father Ramsay MacDonald's National Government. The constituency includes the towns of Worksop, Warsop and part of Mansfield. The sitting Labour MP John Mann is a highly active and voluble Member.BATHThis is an ancient constituency constantly represented in Parliament since boroughs were first summoned to send members in the 13th century. Its best-known Members have been William Pitt the Elder (Prime Minister 1766-1768) and later Chris Patten. Mr Patten, who was chairman of the Conservative Party in 1992, lost the seat to the Liberal Democrat Don Foster, who has held it ever since. Mr Foster, who has been described as "gruffly reasonable and strongly motivated" has held a number of front-bench portfolios for his party. The city was founded by the Romans as a spa resort and was popular in Georgian times when Jane Austen stayed there.    BATLEY AND SPENThis is a marginal seat between Labour and the Conservatives, with Labour in the ascendancy since 1997. The sitting MP bearded Mike Wood had a majority of about 6,000 last time, but Labour can expect a tough challenge from the Tories. Biscuits are in the political headlines (Gordon Brown likes those "with a bit of chocolate") and there is a campaign afoot to keep the Fox's Biscuits base in Batley.BATTERSEAThe Tories are confident of regaining this south west London seat where Labour "enjoy" a majority of only 163. The sitting MP Stockholm-born Martin Linton, an ex-Guardian journalist, has held it since 1997. Until the 1980s, Battersea Labour Club had a notice on its notice board banning Communists from admission to the club – a legacy from the 1920s when Battersea North was represented by a Communist - a rich, aristocratic Indian.BEACONSFIELDA rock-solid Conservative rural seat where the sitting MP shadow Cabinet member Dominic Grieve will be defending a majority of about 15,000. Even in the Tory disaster year of 1997, they secured a majority of nearly 14,000. Tony Blair stood as the Labour candidate in the 1982 by-election here. He came a bad third, 6,000 votes behind the runners-up, the Liberal Democrats. Benjamin Disraeli, 19th century Tory Prime Minister and Buckinghamshire’s MP, went on to become Earl of Beaconsfield. BECKENHAMBeckenham has never elected anyone other than a Conservative MP in modern times, largely because the suburban parts of the constituency, including parts of Bromley, and Beckenham itself, are firmly Tory. The anti-Conservative vote is generally split between Labour and the Liberal Democrats. There was a wobbly moment in November 1997 at a by-election caused by the resignation of the late Piers Merchant over a sex scandal. The new Tory candidate Jacqui Lait scraped home with a majority of just over 1,000. But last time the majority was more than 8,000 and may possibly be doubled by boundary changes.BEDFORDLabour are defending a majority here of below 3,500. But Tories will have a tough fight if they are to win a seat which has been in Labour hands since 1997. The sitting MP Patrick Hall was a planning officer for Bedford before being elected to Parliament. In 1768, Bedford was represented by the famous brewer Samuel Whitbread. John Bunyan, author of Pilgrim’s Progress, was imprisoned in the town’s jail in the 17th century.BEDFORDSHIRE MIDRural Mid-Bedfordshire has had Conservative MPs continuously since 1931 – and there is no sign that the situation will change after this election. The sitting MP Nadine Dorries, who won the seat at the last election, is an outspoken backbencher more famous for her blogs than for her parliamentary performances. Liverpool-born Mrs Dorries, who has described herself as "a council estate Scouser", is a strong anti-abortionist and has campaigned for MPs to take a tougher stance over the expenses scandal. Although her great-grandfather goalkeeper George Bargery was a founder of Everton FC, she is a fervent supporter of Liverpool.BEDFORDSHIRE NORTH EASTThe Conservatives are sure to retain this rural seat, which includes the towns of Biggleswade and Sandy and which contains a high proportion of professional people. The sitting MP Alistair Burt, who has represented the constituency since 2001, had a majority of more than 12,000 last time. Mr Burt, a lawyer, earlier represented Bury North (his birthplace) for some 14 years before losing the seat in 1997.BEDFORDSHIRE SOUTH WESTThis should be a safe Tory seat but their opponents have occasionally given the Conservatives a bumpy ride. At the 1997 general election, Labour sensationally reduced a 21,273 Tory majority to a mere 132. Since then, the Conservatives have restored at least some of their supremacy and will be defending a majority of more than 8,000. The sitting MP Andrew Selous has been described as being "tall and dark with a strangely elongated faced, like a Modigliani painting". The constituency takes in Leighton Buzzard, Dunstable – and Whipsnade Zoo. BELFAST EASTThis is an overwhelmingly Unionist constituency in which Nationalist parties routinely fail to secure more than 10% of the poll. It is dominated by the giant "Samson and Goliath" cranes of the Harland and Wolff shipyard and the seat also includes Stormont, as well as some exclusive residential districts such as the much mocked Cherryvalley. Members of both the Harland and the Wolff families have represented this seat in the past. The present incumbent is Democratic Unionist Peter Robinson. Belfast East contains a higher percentage of Methodists than any other Northern Ireland constituency. BELFAST NORTHThis seat suffered the highest level of violence during the Troubles and many Protestants left the area, although it remains a Unionist-held constituency, with Sinn Fein usually the runners-up. It is a kaleidoscope of rich and poor. Sectarian divisions are stark with a number of peace lines cutting through the constituency. The sitting MP barrister Nigel Dodds, Democratic Unionist Party, has twice been attacked by IRA terrorists.BELFAST SOUTHThe constituency contains some of Belfast's most exclusive residential districts as well as Queen's University. The overall tenor of the constituency is middle-class - young, trendy and cosmopolitan towards the city centre, with Northern Ireland's biggest concentrations of both students and ethnic minorities. In 1981 the sitting MP Robert Bradford was assassinated by the IRA in a Belfast community centre. At the last election the moderate Social Democrat and Labour Party wrested the seat from the Unionists securing a 1,200 majority. Its sitting MP is Dr Alasdair McDonnell.BELFAST WESTThis is the most Nationalist of all the Belfast seats and in recent years the Unionist vote has dwindled to tiny proportions. It includes the fiercely Nationalist Falls Road. The seat is held by Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein leader. He won it first in 1983, lost it in 1992, and regained it in 1997. Mr Adams, like his other Sinn Fein colleagues who are MPs, does not attend Westminster.BERMONDSEY AND OLD SOUTHWARKThis is a new seat in the heart of London, based on the North Southwark and Bermondsey constituency. It includes Tate Modern, the Globe Theatre, Borough Market and Elephant and Castle. It has been held by Liberal Democrat Simon Hughes continuously since 1983 when he took it on a swing of more than 40%. He had a 5,400 majority in the former seat which comprises much of the new one.BERWICK UPON TWEEDThis is the most northerly English constituency and the most sparsely populated, with only 57,000 electors. It relies on agriculture, fishing and tourism. The mild-mannered Liberal Democrat Sir Alan Beith, a devout Christian, wrested the seat from the Conservatives at a 1973 by-election, and has held it ever since. BERWICKSHIRE, ROXBURGH AND SELKIRKThis rural constituency on the Scottish borders, was created for the last general election. It is held by the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives in hot pursuit, and with the Scottish Nationalists running a bad fourth behind Labour. The sitting MP accountant Michael Moore, spokesman for international development, is regarded as a rising star in the Scottish Liberal Democrats, of which he is deputy leader.BETHNAL GREEN AND BOWThis is one of the poorest constituencies in London with an ethnically diverse population. In 2005, it was surprisingly won by the Respect candidate George Galloway (a former Labour MP) who narrowly wrested the seat from the popular Labour MP Oona King. Astonishingly in 1997 there was a 6% swing to the Tories in this constituency where practically everywhere else there was a landslide swing against them. This may have had something to do with the refusal of Labour to adopt a Bangladeshi candidate. Mr Galloway is down to contest Poplar and Limehouse this time. BEVERLEY AND HOLDERNESSThe Conservatives have managed to hold on to this East Yorkshire constituency for several elections, although never with a very convincing majority. It borders the North Sea from Skipsea to Spurn Point and the Humber Estuary to Hedon. A ballot box was stolen after the 2005 election. Coastal defence and flooding are two big issues here. The sitting MP is Graham Stuart, a magazine publisher, who first fought the seat in 2005. He had a majority of 2,580 over Labour last time. The previous MP, James Cran once told a reporter that he regarded the press as lower than vermin.BEXHILL AND BATTLEThis is a safe Tory seat in East Sussex covering a coastal strip between Hastings and Eastbourne, where the Conservatives had a majority of 13,449 over the Liberal Democrats in 2005. The sitting MP millionaire Gregory Barker, an investment banker, is shadow climate change minister. Barker was once Head of Communications at the Anglo Siberian Oil Company and also worked in Russia for the Sibneft Oil Group, owned by Roman Abramovich, the Chelsea FC owner. The constituency boasts the site of the Battle of Hastings, the landmark clash between King Harold and William the Conqueror in 1066 – the most famous date in English history.BEXLEYHEATH AND CRAYFORDA marginal seat in the London Borough of Bexley. It is in the capital's commuter belt and is heavily owner-occupied. The Tories managed to wrest the seat from Labour in 2005. The sitting Member, David Evennett, is the only MP who was defeated in Labour's landslide of 1997, to have unsuccessfully fought the same seat in 2001 and finally to have won it in 2005. Mr Evennett, who will be defending a majority of over 4,000 – probably boosted by boundary changes, was formerly MP for Erith and Crayford until that seat was abolished in 1997.BIRKENHEADThis is a rock-solid Labour seat across the Mersey from Liverpool, held since 1979 by Frank Field, one of the most independent-minded and outspoken Labour MPs at Westminster. He was made welfare minister by Tony Blair who asked him to "think the unthinkable" – and was sacked when he did so. Field, one of the most vocal critics of his own Government, was once a Conservative but left because of his opposition to South Africa's apartheid regime.BIRMINGHAM EDGBASTONThis is a marginal constituency to the south and south-east of Birmingham's centre, which has been represented only by women MPs since 1953. This is likely to continue because the Conservative candidate is Deirdre Alden. It was once the seat of Neville Chamberlain, Prime Minister from 1937 to 1940. This neat and mostly middle-class area was a safe Conservative seat for years but pockets of deprivation in the suburbs turned it into a marginal. The sitting MP Gisela Stuart was born in Bavaria but came to England in 1974 to improve her English. She won the seat in 1997 after it had been more than 70 years in Tory hands. It includes the famous test cricket ground of the same name.BIRMINGHAM ERDINGTONThis Labour-held seat to the north-east of Birmingham is a mix of council estates and more affluent suburbs. It is also the "home" of the Spaghetti Junction motorway interchange. There are signs of a Tory revival here, but they will have a hard task to crack the present Labour majority of more than 9,500.The sitting MP Sion Simon, a former journalist, was once described by London's Mayor Boris Johnson as "a radiant vision of grinning New Labour complacency". He provoked a huge row when he pretended in a spoof video to be David Cameron offering people the chance to sleep with his wife.BIRMINGHAM HALL GREENLabour won this suburban seat in 1997 for the first time since its creation in 1950. Many constituents were employed in the car industry, notably Rover's nearby factories. One famous landmark is Sarehole Mill, where J. R. R. Tolkien spent his boyhood and which provided the inspiration for The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings. The sitting MP Stephen McCabe has decided not to apply for the redrawn Hall Green seat on the grounds that its boundaries are significantly different from the existing seat. The changes have the likely effect of Tories being replaced by Lib Dems as the main challengers. BIRMINGHAM HODGE HILLThis constituency to the east of central Birmingham is regarded as the most deprived in the region with "very few" middle-class residents. It includes the predominantly Asian inner-city area of Washwood Heath and the mostly white area of Shard End. Although Labour should have huge majorities here, at a by-election in 2004, the party scraped home with only a 460 majority. The sitting MP Liam Byrne, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, wrote a memo to his staff demanding a cappuccino on his arrival in the office, an espresso at 3pm, and soup between 12:30 and 1pm. This was described by his opponents as "not a memo to staff but a memo to slaves".BIRMINGHAM LADYWOODThis constituency which includes the entire city centre of Birmingham has 81% of families living below the official poverty line – one of the highest in the country, and has the highest unemployment rate in the whole of the West Midlands. It includes Aston Villa and Birmingham City football grounds. The seat has remained firmly in Labour hands since 1945, except for a brief period (1969-70) when it was won by the Liberals in a by-election. Clare Short, a former Cabinet Minister, the seat's controversial and outspoken MP, resigned the Labour whip in 2006 and continued as "Independent Labour". She has been described as a parliamentary "bovver girl".BIRMINGHAM NORTHFIELDThe constituency's most notable feature is the now closed MG Rover Group factory which had long dominated the area. Even though it closed in the run-up to the 2005 general election, Labour managed to hang on to the seat. It is also the home of Cadbury's chocolate. Until 1992 this had been a Tory-held seat but Labour have won it ever since. The sitting MP Richard Burden, a former trade union official, had a 6,500 majority over the Conservatives last time.BIRMINGHAM PERRY BARRThis is, or should be, a safe Labour seat which is the location of the Birmingham City University campus. It covers a broad area of north-west Birmingham, and although it has affluent parts, much of the deprivation area is concentrated on Handsworth. The sitting MP is Kashmir-born Khalid Mahmood, a former community worker.BIRMINGHAM SELLY OAKThis is a seat which has switched hands three times between Labour and Conservative since it was created in 1955. The seat has progressively swung towards Labour from being a safe Conservative seat, due to housing redevelopments in the sixties and seventies. At present it is held by Labour with a seemingly comfortable majority of nearly 9,000. The sitting MP left-winger Lynne Jones is not fighting this time. Much of neighbouring Hall Green is included in the new Selly Oak under boundary changes. BIRMINGHAM YARDLEYThis is a bellwether seat. In every general election recorded, it has, with two exceptions (1992 and 2005) returned a candidate of the governing party. This is one of those rare seats: a Liberal Democrat-Labour marginal. The Lib Dem MP John Hemming once claimed he had 26 extra-marital affairs, and voted for himself in a News of the World Love Rat of the Year competition. He runs his car on vegetable oil and was once beaten by a dog representing the Silly Party at an Oxford University election. BISHOP AUCKLANDThis is an ex-mining Labour stronghold in South Durham, with unexpected rural pockets. Labour will be defending a majority of more than 10,000. The sitting MP Helen Goodman was selected to fight the seat for the 2005 general election from a controversial women-only shortlist. She is a junior Minister in the Department for Work and Pensions. Before entering Parliament she had been head of strategy at the Treasury and occupied a similar post with the Children's Society. She is a member of the Christian Socialist Movement.BLACKBURNThis Lancashire seat is now a Labour stronghold after being a marginal. The sitting MP is Justice Secretary Jack Straw who will be defending a majority of more than 8,000. Before him the area was represented from 1950 by Barbara Castle, the flame-haired firebrand of the left. At the last election, 50% more people used a postal vote in this constituency than was the case in the 2001 election. This gave rise to allegations of political corruption, with some voters allegedly being persuaded to hand their postal votes over to the Labour Party. Nothing was ever proved. At the last election, the BNP polled more than 2,000 votes. In the early 1900s the seat was represented by Philip Snowden who was to become Labour's first Chancellor of the Exchequer.BLACKLEY AND BROUGHTON This is a new seat in Greater Manchester comprising parts of Manchester Blackley and Salford. It must be a Labour stronghold with every councillor in the constituency being Labour. The absence of the prefix "Manchester" has been a source of contention in the area. The seat includes cramped terraced houses and council estates, with significant Jewish, Muslim, West Indian, Sikh and Polish communities. Strangeways Prison, now officially called HMP Manchester, is also in the constituency.BLACKPOOL NORTH AND CLEVELEYSThis is a new seat comprising Blackpool's Northern half with Cleveleys at present in the Wyre constituency. The seat of Blackpool North and Fleetwood is abolished. And the absence of Labour-leaning Fleetwood from this constituency must give the Tories great hopes of capturing it this time. Joan Humble is the present Labour MP for Blackpool North and Fleetwood. Mrs Humble, a former civil servant, entered Parliament in 1997 as one of the Blair Babes.BLACKPOOL SOUTHBlackpool Tower, the Pleasure Beach, all three piers and Blackpool Airport are all included in this seat. The sitting MP, Labour's Gordon Marsden, is a historian and a former editor of History Today. He has been described as being too lively and interesting to be a minister. He wrested the seat from the Conservatives in 1997 and his majority was just under 8,000 last time which could be reduced by boundary changes.BLAENAU GWENTThis constituency, formerly called Ebbw Vale was once held by Aneurin Bevan, founder of the National Health Service, and Michael Foot, former Labour leader. It was once the safest Labour seat in the land where the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats have secured pitiful support. But a row over an all-woman short list cost Labour the seat in 2005. It was won by Independent Peter Law who died within a year. At the subsequent by-election, Labour again failed and the seat was won by Law's former campaign manager Dai Davies.BLAYDONThis supposedly Labour stronghold in Tyne and Wear has surprisingly turned into a winnable target for the Liberal Democrats. At the 2005 election, the Lib Dems came within 6,000 votes of Labour in a constituency which used to return Labour majorities of as much as 17,000. The constituency, which stretches far out into the countryside, has been described as the cradle of the Industrial Revolution. The sitting MP Sunderland-born David Anderson worked as a miner for 20 years and then as a care worker before entering Parliament in 2005.BLYTH VALLEYThis former Northumberland coalfield constituency is, or should be, an impregnable Labour stronghold. What Tory vote there was has plunged miserably in recent elections, with the Liberal Democrats the runners-up. The former miner – he went down the pit at the age of 14 – Ronnie Campbell has held this North-Eastern ex-mining seat since 1987. He once accidentally supported National Fetish Day, under the misapprehension that "fetish" meant worrying, "like worrying about backing the right horse".BOGNOR REGIS AND LITTLEHAMPTONThis South Coast seat was created in 1997 and has been Conservative-held ever since. It has been described as an area of "white, wealthy, middle-class pensioners" and includes Bognor Regis, Arundel and Littlehampton within its boundaries. The sitting MP Nick Gibb is a chartered accountant specialising in taxation. Mr Gibb, shadow Schools Minister, is a former political aide to Cecil Parkinson. BOLSOVERBolsover is an invincible Labour seat and former mining area in the North-East of Derbyshire. Following the run-down of mining, tourism is emerging: the constituency includes Bolsover Castle, owned by English Heritage and the important archaeological site Creswell Crags. But Bolsover is as famed for its MP, the voluble and contentious Dennis Skinner, as for anything else. Mr Skinner, who has held the seat since 1970, earned the title "The Beast of Bolsover".BOLTON NORTH EASTThis industrial seat was created for the 1983 General Election from parts of the constituencies of Bolton West and the former Bolton East. A socially very mixed and highly marginal seat, it covers Bolton's town centre, and the districts in close proximity. At present it is held by Labour but their majority of just over 4,000 over the Conservatives looks fragile in the current political climate. The sitting MP David Crausby, an engineer, was that rarity a blue-collar worker in Labour's 1997 intake. He has been described as a "low-profile loyalist".BOLTON SOUTH EASTThis constituency, in its present form, was created in 1983, and unlike the other two Bolton seats has remained safely Labour. It comprises largely the industrial surrounds of Bolton. The sitting MP Brian Iddon, a former university lecturer in organic chemistry, has been described as old Labour Eurosceptic. Labour will be defending a majority of more than 11,000 over the Conservatives.BOLTON WESTThis is a marginal constituency which Labour wrested from the Tories in 1997 and have held ever since. The constituency largely takes in Bolton's principal smart residential areas. It has been represented since 1997 by Ruth Kelly a "Blair Babe" who held various Cabinet posts including that of Communities Secretary. She is not contesting this election . Labour had a fragile 2,000 majority last time, although it will probably be helped by boundary changes.BOOTLEThis Merseyside dockland constituency is now virtually impregnable Labour territory, but it was once a safe Conservative seat, represented early in the 20th century by Bonar Law. It has also had Liberal representation. There were two by-elections here in 1990: first when Allan Roberts died. His successor, Michael Carr himself died after only 57 days in office. The seat was then won by Joe Benton who commands huge majorities.. Benton, a former factory worker and personnel manager, secured 75.5% of the vote at the last election.BOSTON AND SKEGNESSA safe Conservative seat with seaside and rural features, comprising the bracing East Coast resort and the surrounding farmland. The sitting MP Tory Mark Simmonds, a chartered surveyor, has held the seat since 2001. He had a majority of nearly 6,000 last time. At the last election Ukip came third (ahead of the Liberal Democrats) with more than 4,000 votes – one of that party's strongest showings in the entire country.BOSWORTHThis Leicestershire seat was Labour for 25 years until the Conservatives gained it in the 1970 general election and have held it since. The seat had a coal mining tradition now engulfed by the residential town of Hinckley and its rural hinterland. The 1485 battle ended the life of Richard III and the Wars of the Roses. David Tredinnick has held the seat for the Tories since 1987. He is an Old Etonian and ex-Guards officer and is a supporter of complementary and alternative medicine. He was once suspended for 20 days after being implicated in the cash-for-questions affair. The Tories will be defending a majority of just over 5,000.BOURNEMOUTH EASTA Tory-held target seat for the Liberal Democrats, who have been breathing down the necks, in voting terms, of the Conservatives at the last two general elections. The Conservatives will be defending a 5,000 majority, but a spirited campaign by the Lib Dems could set alarm bells ringing in the Tory camp. The sitting MP New York born Tobias Ellwood is a former captain in the Royal Green Jackets. His front-bench responsibilities cover gambling, licensing and tourism which are of specific interest to Bournemouth. In June, 2009, he was beaten up by a gang of youths he confronted for playing football in the street.BOURNEMOUTH WESTThis seaside constituency has elected a Tory MP at every election since its creation in 1950. At the last General Election the Liberal Democrats overtook Labour to become the runners up. Sir John Butterfill won the seat in 1983 and has held it ever since. Sir John, regarded as a Tory grandee, remained a back-bencher for the entirety of his parliamentary career. He is not contesting this election, but the Tories will be defending a majority of just over 4,000, although this could be hit by boundary changes.BRACKNELLThis rural Berkshire constituency has had only one MP since its creation, Conservative Andrew MacKay, who is standing down at this election as a direct result of the expenses row. His successor, local family doctor Philip Lee, who was chosen in an American-style open primary, a contest open to all registered Bracknell voters, will be defending a majority of over 12,000.BRADFORD EASTThis constituency which was abolished in 1974, reappears at this election. It is the successor to the existing Bradford North constituency which was created in 1918 and now itself disappears. The new seat is entirely within Bradford city boundaries. The area has been dogged over the years by riots. Experts forecast Liberal Democrats as the main challengers to Labour in this constituency. BRADFORD SOUTHThis seat was Liberal-held in the 1920s and 1930s, but has returned a Labour MP every time since 1945, usually with a comfortable majority. It has been described as a tough inner-city constituency with a few middle-class pockets. The sitting Labour MP is Gerry Sutcliffe, a former salesman, a modernising trade union man rather than a slick-suited party man. He has served as a junior minister in the Departments of Justice, Culture and Trade and Industry.BRADFORD WESTThis inner-city seat has a strong Asian population, and is now highly marginal. It is held by Labour, but with only a 3,000 majority over the Conservatives. At the last general election the British National Party polled 2,500 votes in this constituency. The sitting Labour MP is Marsha Singh, who, because his name gives the wrong impression, sometimes receives mail beginning "Dear Madam".BRAINTREEThis marginal constituency has been modified by the creation of the new Witham seat. It now extends to the Stour Valley area against the borders of Suffolk. This large central Essex seat contains a mixture of urban working class and well-to-do villages. It is now held by the Conservatives with a majority of under 4,000 over Labour, likely to be boosted by boundary changes. The Tories held the seat for 20 years until Labour snatched it from them in 1997. Labour's Alan Hurst retained it by a whisker in 2001 but the Tories won it back in 2005. The sitting MP is millionaire financier Brooks Newmark, an Opposition whip.BRECON AND RADNORSHIREThis is, by area, the largest single constituency in England and Wales. It is also one of the most picturesque seats in the country, containing Brecon Beacons National Park. It was once a Labour stronghold. It flirted for a while with the Conservatives but has been in Liberal Democrat hands since 1997. The present incumbent, Roger Williams, had a majority of under 4,000 over the Conservatives last time. Mr Williams, an ex-farmer, is a former chairman of Brecon Beacons National Park. He is a Lib Dem whip.BRENT CENTRALThis is a new London constituency created in part from the abolition of Brent South and Brent East, providing a mix of Liberal Democrat and Labour territory. The Conservatives do not hold a single ward in this constituency. The Labour candidate is Dawn Butler, the present MP for Brent South. She was the third black woman to have been elected to Parliament. In 2009, she was made Minister for Young Citizens and Youth Engagement, operating from the Cabinet Office, the first black woman to become a minister at Westminster. Her Liberal Democrat opponent will be Sarah Teather, the present diminutive MP for Brent East.BRENT NORTHThis urban seat in north-west London, with a significant Asian population, used to command huge Conservative majorities, but the tables turned dramatically from 1997 onwards. In that election, Labour overturned a Tory majority of 10,000 to a 10,000 majority on their own account. The Conservatives have caught up since then, but Labour still are defending a 5,000 majority, boosted further by boundary changes. The sitting MP Barry Gardiner used to lecture at the Academy of National Economy in Moscow. He has been a sharp critic of Gordon Brown accusing the Prime Minister of "vacillation, loss of international credibility and timorous political manoeuvres that the public cannot understand".BRENTFORD AND ISLEWORTHThis west London suburban seat with a large Asian population was wrested from the Conservatives by Labour in 1997 after years as a relatively safe Tory stronghold. The sitting MP Ann Keen is a former prize-winning nurse. Her husband Alan and sister Sylvia Heal are also Labour MPs. Labour will be defending a majority of under 4,500.BRENTWOOD AND ONGARThis Essex seat in the Green Belt north-east of London, is now a Conservative stronghold represented since 1992 by Eric Pickles, the Thatcherite Tory Party chairman. He will be defending a majority of more than 11,500-plus, but he had a fright in 2001 when former war correspondent and anti-corruption campaigner Martin Bell ran him close.BRIDGENDThis mid-Glamorgan seat, mainly urban and prosperous in parts, briefly had a Conservative MP in the 1980s but Labour have now held it for more than 20 years. The sitting MP, since 2005, Madeleine Moon, a former Mayor of Porthcawl, received a high public profile after the series of suicides of young people in her constituency. She agreed with South Wales Police that the suicides were not connected, and she criticised the media coverage. Ms Moon has also mounted a campaign to protect the moth population. She had a majority of 6,523, last time.BRIDGWATER AND SOMERSET WESTThis is a new seat based on the former seat of Bridgwater, one of the oldest constituencies in England. This rural constituency has been expanded following the review of Somerset's existing parliamentary constituencies. The Conservative MP in the existing constituency is Ian Liddell-Grainger, a great, great, great grandson of Queen Victoria and 323rd in the line of succession to the Throne. At the last election Liddell-Grainger secured an 8,500 majority over Labour which narrowly beat the Liberal Democrats into second place.BRIGG AND GOOLEThis Labour-held Humberside seat dominated by docks will be a key battleground at this election with barely 3,000 votes separating them from the Conservatives who will hope to take this constituency. It is one of the few constituencies which span a ceremonial county boundary, in this case that between Lincolnshire and East Riding of Yorkshire. Ian Cawsey, who has represented the seat since 1997, was once publicly described as "a special kind of genius".BRIGHTON KEMPTOWNThis is another former Tory "stronghold" which Labour won in 1997 and have held ever since. The inclusion of Peacehaven, a semi-rural area, into the constituency in that year was thought to favour the Conservatives. In fact, to their surprise it had the reverse effect. But the Tories, who came within 3,000 votes of Labour in 2005, will be expecting to win it back this time. The sitting MP Des Turner, a bio-chemist, has announced he will not be contesting this election. BRIGHTON PAVILIONThis was historically a Conservative seat which swung dramatically to Labour in that party's landslide victory of 1997. But since then, although Labour have clung on to the seat, they have seen their majority fall markedly. The Conservatives, however, will be hoping to smash Labour's existing majority of about 5,000. This is a constituency where the Greens have a strong following. In the 2005 election they came third, fewer than 1,000 votes behind the Conservatives, and this remains one of their principal target seats. The sitting MP David Lepper is not contesting this election.BRISTOL EASTThis is a Labour-held seat with a substantial number of skilled working class voters in it. The sitting MP Kerry McCarthy had a majority of more than 8,000 over the Liberal Democrats in 2005. Boundary changes might just have slipped Tories into second place. Labour would be disappointed not to hold this seat, especially since the Liberal Democrat and Conservatives seriously split the anti-Labour vote. A former MP here was Sir Stafford Cripps, Labour's post-war "austerity" Chancellor of the Exchequer.BRISTOL NORTH WESTThis is another bellwether constituency, having elected the candidate of the winning party in every general election since October 1974. It includes the Filton British Aerospace and Rolls Royce factory. The sitting Labour MP Doug Naysmith, a university lecturer and immunologist, who won the seat from the Tories in 1997, will not be contesting this election. Labour will be defending a majority of nearly 9,000, but Conservatives look set to benefit considerably from boundary changes.BRISTOL SOUTHThis constituency has regularly returned a Labour MP since 1935 – and there is little prospect of that changing this time, even given the slight boundary modifications. This is the least prosperous of all the Bristol constituencies, with large housing estates. The sitting MP Dawn Primarolo has represented the seat since 1987. According to her colleagues, during that time she has "morphed" from being known as "Red Dawn" to "Rosy Pink". She has served as a middle-rank minister in the Department of Health and the Treasury, and goes into the election with a commanding majority of about 11,000 over the Liberal Democrats. In 1992, the seat was unsuccessfully contested by John Bercow, the present Speaker, as a Tory candidate.BRISTOL WESTThe seat, a three-way marginal in an elegant university and residential suburb, was held by the Conservatives for 112 years before Labour won it at the 1997 general election. But at the last general election it fell into the hands of the Liberal Democrats who command a majority of more than 5,000 over Labour, which could however benefit from boundary changes . Stephen Williams was the first Liberal Democrat ever to be elected to this constituency and the first Liberal elected to a Bristol seat since 1935.This surprise result is believed to have come about largely because of the large student electorate in the constituency, hostile to Labour's top-up fees policy. Mr Williams, a former tax consultant, has been a front-bench party spokesman mainly on educational and health issues.BROADLANDThis is a new constituency, a successor seat to Mid-Norfolk, but also including parts of North Norfolk and Norwich North. This rural seat is a target for the Liberal Democrats, whose prospects have been boosted by local government election successes in the area. The Conservative candidate will be Norwich-born military historian Keith Simpson, the present MP for the disappearing Mid-Norfolk seat. There he secured a majority of 7,500 at the last election. The notional Conservative majority in the new seat has been fixed at around 6,000.BROMLEY AND CHISLEHURSTThis relatively prosperous, London suburban and predominantly white constituency was regarded as one of the Tories' safest seats. But a by-election in 2006 came as a nasty shock: the 13,000 majority was reduced to a mere 600. This reduced majority was put down to a low turn-out and the presence of Nigel Farage, the charismatic Ukip leader, in the contest. He beat Labour into fourth place. The by-election was caused by the sudden death of the sitting MP Eric Forth. His successor was London Assembly member pro-European Bob Neill, nicknamed "Three Jobs Bob" because of his – entirely legitimate – extra-parliamentary activities. This seat, when it was just Bromley, was held by Harold Macmillan from 1945 to 1964.BROMSGROVEThis seat has always returned a Conservative MP since it split from neighbouring Redditch in 1974. It covers the north-eastern end of Worcestershire with a predominantly middle-class population. Many of the constituents work in Birmingham. The sitting MP Julie Kirkbride, a former political correspondent, who secured a 10,000 majority over Labour at the last election, announced that she would be standing down at this election in the wake of the expenses affair. BROXBOURNEThis Hertfordshire seat to the north-east of London includes Cheshunt and Waltham Cross within its boundaries. The sitting MP Charles Walker is the only Conservative Member in the outgoing Parliament who is a trade union member (Amicus). He is the stepson of Christopher Chataway, the former athlete and ex-Tory MP. He was one of 23 MPs who signed a motion of no confidence in the last Speaker, Michael Martin. The Tories enter this election defending a majority of 11,500 over Labour.BROXTOWEThis residential suburban seat to the west of Nottingham promises to be a battle royal between Labour and Conservative. Labour scraped home with a majority of under 2,300 in 2005. This was a seat which, until 1997, had been in Conservative hands for 14 years. The current MP Nick Palmer is a former computer manager. He speaks six languages, has written books on conflict simulation games and has represented the Commons at bridge. He proposed to the woman who became his wife on the terrace of the House of Commons.BUCKINGHAMThis ancient seat (it was created in the 16th century) was in Conservative hands through most of the 20th century, except for two periods when it was held by Labour, including controversial publisher the late Robert Maxwell. This seat comprises affluent rural villages, and is the largest constituency in Buckinghamshire. The constituency is now held by the Commons Speaker, John Bercow and if tradition is followed he would not be opposed by major parties at this election. However, Nigel Farage, the leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party has announced that he will be fighting the seat. Bercow's Tory majority at the last election was 18,129, the party's highest numerical majority in the country.BURNLEYThis is a traditional Labour seat, but the Liberal Democrats, who were runners up last time, will be hoping to wrest it from them at this election. The sitting Labour MP, Kitty Ussher, who was first elected in 2005 and has now said she will not be contesting this election, secured a majority for Labour of under 6,000, making the seat highly vulnerable. This is an area where the BNP is active. Last time they polled only a few hundred fewer votes than the Tories who came a bad fourth. Ms Ussher, who has been described as "a rising star" in Labour's ranks, resigned as a junior Treasury Minister after the expenses row. She announced she will not be fighting this election because of parental responsibilities.BURTONThis is a highly marginal seat which the Tories will be hoping to win back from Labour. It was in Conservative hands from 1950 until 1997, with the brewing industry traditionally strong supporters of the Tories. But the seat fell into Labour hands in the 1997 landslide and has been Labour ever since. But it is highly vulnerable, with a majority over the Conservatives of under 1,500 in 2005 . In addition to brewing, this seat contains JCB factories and is an area of high unemployment. The sitting MP former bank clerk Janet Dean has held the seat since 1997. She will not be fighting this election.BURY NORTHThis Labour-held largely residential seat may well fall to the Conservatives. Labour "enjoy" a majority of under 3,000 making it highly vulnerable to a Tory triumph. Labour secured the seat in their landslide victory of 1997 and have held it ever since. But before that this marginal had been in Tory hands for some years. The sitting MP David Chaytor, a former teacher, has announced that he will not be contesting this election.BURY SOUTHThis constituency is something of a misnomer because it does not actually include any area of the town of Bury itself, but only towns to its south. The seat borders on Salford and contains a large orthodox Jewish population. It has swung strongly in Labour's favour since they wrested it from the Conservatives in 1997. The strongly Blairite sitting MP Ivan Lewis, who formerly worked in the voluntary sector, will be defending a majority of about 9,000.BURY ST EDMUNDSThis agricultural seat in Suffolk is expected to remain in Conservative hands. The Conservatives go into battle to defend a majority of close to 10,000. The sitting MP David Ruffley, a solicitor and pro-Europe, backed a so far unsuccessful campaign to have St Edmund – a King of East Anglia martyred by the Danes - restored as the patron saint of England.CAERPHILLYThis is a Labour stronghold, with Plaid Cymru usually the runners up, although well behind Labour. The constituency comprises remote ex-mining valleys north of Cardiff. The sitting MP former teacher Wayne David, a junior Welsh Office Minister, won a majority of more than 15,000 last time. He is also a noted Welsh historian.CAITHNESS, SUTHERLAND AND EASTER ROSSThis most northerly seat of the mainland is now regarded as a Liberal Democrat stronghold. Labour usually run second here but pose no immediate threat. And in recent elections the Conservatives have been pushed into fourth place by the Scottish Nationalists. This huge constituency, beyond the Highlands, includes the Dounreay nuclear plant. The sitting MP Old Etonian John Thurso, who is regarded by some as the best-dressed Member at Westminster, will be defending a majority of over 8,000.CALDER VALLEY Labour captured this West Yorkshire seat from the Conservatives in 1997 and have retained it ever since. But there is every prospect that the Tories will wrest it back this time, as Labour secured only a wafer-thin majority of under 1,500 at the last election. The seat runs south of Halifax to Todmorden and Brighouse. The sitting MP Christine McCafferty, who won it in 1997, has announced that she will not be contesting this election.CAMBERWELL AND PECKHAMThis is a Labour Party stronghold which had the "distinction" of having a higher proportion of poor people than any other constituency in the country in 2000 as well as a high rate of unemployment. This South London constituency was created in 1997. Its first and only MP, as of 2009 is Harriet Harman, Leader of the Commons and Deputy Leader of the Labour Party. She was MP for the preceding constituency of Peckham since a 1982 by-election. She will go into the election with a majority of nearly 13,500, further boosted by boundary changes, over the Liberal Democrats.CAMBORNE AND REDRUTHThis is a new seat which promises to be highly three-way marginal. Julia Goldsworthy, the Liberal Democrat MP for the disappearing Falmouth and Camborne seat, will be standing for her party here. She had a majority of only 1,886 over Labour, with the Tories hot on their heels. The constituency was the centre of a one-time thriving Cornish tin mining industry with the world-famous Camborne School of Mines. CAMBRIDGEThis is a marginal seat which has had MPs from all three main parties within the past 17 years. Labour won it from the Conservatives in 1992, but the Liberal Democrats stormed to victory in 2005 – by under 4,500. Labour's defeat in 2005 may have had something to do with the student population's antagonism towards the party's top-up fees policy. The Tory vote has plunged alarmingly since the seat was in their hands. The sitting MP, David Howarth, is the first Liberal or Liberal Democrat to hold Cambridge since the 1906 general election. He is standing down at this election to return to academia.CAMBRIDGESHIRE NORTH EASTThis seat includes the whole of the Fenland. The present MP Malcolm Moss, a former Northern Ireland Minister, has announced that he will not contest this election. Mr Moss, a former teacher and company director, has represented the seat since 1987. At the last general election he secured a majority of nearly 9,000 over Labour. A former, Liberal Democrat, MP for the area was Clement Freud, broadcaster and bon viveur.  CAMBRIDGESHIRE NORTH WESTThis is a relatively new seat, created in 1997, comprising large housing estates and farmland outside Peterborough. It is seemingly an impregnable Conservative stronghold which secured a majority of little short of 10,000 at the last general election. The sitting MP, Uganda-born Shailesh Vara, a solicitor, is a former vice-chairman of the party. Vara, a martial arts expert, was once publicly described as a future leader of the party.CAMBRIDGESHIRE SOUTHThis seat starts at the edge of the city of Cambridge and comprises rural land to the south. This, too, is a safe Conservative seat. The sitting MP Andrew Lansley had a majority of 8,001 in 2005. He has been shadow health secretary since 2004 and is thus one of the longest holders of the same portfolio in the shadow cabinet. Lansley is a former civil servant. The Liberal Democrats have regularly been runners-up in this constituency with Labour usually running third.CAMBRIDGESHIRE SOUTH EASTEly is the only city – on the basis of its cathedral - in this widespread largely rural constituency which the Conservatives are confident of retaining. They held the seat with a majority of over 8,500 at the last election, with the Liberal Democrats as the runners-up. The sitting MP James Paice, who has a farming background and is strongly pro-European, first won the seat in 1983 and has held it ever since. He held various junior ministerial posts in the John Major government and in Opposition has served as shadow agriculture minister.CANNOCK CHASEThis Labour-held South Staffordshire constituency, which includes the towns of Rugeley and Cannock and a number of power stations, takes its name from the Chase, the Midlands' largest area of surviving lowland heath. It was used as a medieval hunting ground and wild deer, thought to have descended from the herd introduced by the Normans, still roam the park. The sitting MP, Tony Wright, who has held the seat since 1992, will not be fighting this election on health grounds. But he has bequeathed his successor a Labour majority of about 9,000.CANTERBURYThis seat has elected only Conservative MPs since 1874, the longest any current UK constituency has remained under the control of a single party. In addition to most of the city of Canterbury itself, this seat comprises the surrounding villages and the coastal "oyster" town of Whitstable. Julian Brazier, who has represented the seat since 1987, goes into battle with a majority of almost 7,500 to support him. He served 20 years in the Territorial Army and is an energetic opponent of abortion.CARDIFF CENTRALThis is a three-way marginal, having been held successively by the three main political parties since its creation in 1983. The Liberal Democrats gained it in 2005 after 13 years of Labour representation. The constituency comprises both affluent and deprived areas and a large student population. It was probably student opposition to Government plans to reform their support which cost Labour the seat last time. In 2005, Jenny Willott became the first woman and the first Liberal Democrat to hold this seat. She is backed by a majority of more than 5,500 over Labour.CARDIFF NORTHThis now highly marginal seat comprises the residential quarter of the Welsh capital and used to be regarded as reasonably safe Tory territory. But Labour wrested it from them in 1997 and have held it ever since. However the Conservatives will be hoping to regain it this time, as Labour enter the battle with a highly vulnerable majority of 1,100. The sitting MP is Julie Morgan, a former social worker, who is regarded as a stalwart of the South Wales Labour establishment. She is married to Rhodri Morgan, former First Minister of Wales.CARDIFF SOUTH AND PENARTHThis docklands constituency is a staunchly Labour seat which was held – under slightly different boundaries – by former Prime Minister James Callaghan from 1945 to his retirement 42 years later. Now it is held by the Labour veteran and former journalist Alun Michael. In recent years the Liberal Democrats have increased their vote and are now vying with the Conservatives for second place. Labour go into the election with a majority of about 9,000.CARDIFF WESTThis is a traditionally safe Labour seat which used to return George Thomas, the former Commons Speaker. Only once, in 1983 – a disastrous electoral year for Labour – did it return a Conservative MP, the colourful Ukrainian Stefan Terlezki. It includes a dockland area and huge council estates. The sitting MP Kevin Brennan, a former teacher, is a junior minister for children. He secured a majority of more than 8,000 at the last election.CARLISLEThe boundaries of this seat have been modified to take account of population changes. However, it is traditional Labour territory and the party is expected to retain the constituency this time. This is an area which has been at the centre, from time to time, of foot-and-mouth outbreaks. The border city has a major cattle market and dates back to the Romans. The sitting MP Eric Martlew, who secured a majority of 5,500 at the last election, has announced he will not be fighting it this time. CARMARTHEN EAST AND DINEFWRThis large, Welsh-speaking rural seat in south-west Wales has been held by Plaid Cymru since 2001, when they wrested it from Labour. The sitting MP Adam Price is not contesting this election, but his party will be defending a majority of more than 6,500. Previous MPs for Carmarthen included Lady Megan Lloyd George, daughter of the First World War Premier, and the first Plaid Cymru MP, Gwynfor Evans.CARMARTHEN WEST AND PEMBROKESHIRE SOUTHThe Conservatives will be hoping to capture this highly marginal seat from Labour at the election. The Tory vote has been increasing over the years and in 2005 Labour scraped home with a majority of under 2,000 over the Conservatives. The constituency is part urban (Carmarthen) and part rural (Pembrokeshire). It includes Dylan Thomas's homestead of Laugharne. The sitting MP Sheffield-born Nick Ainger, a former dock worker, entered Parliament in 1992.CARSHALTON AND WALLINGTONThe Tories will be looking to regain this once Conservative-held seat from the Liberal Democrats who have held it since 1997. This suburban Greater London seat, now a highly marginal constituency between the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives, is dominated by its large residential areas including huge council estates. The sitting MP Tom Brake won the seat from the Tories in 1997 and has held it ever since. Brake, a fluent French speaker, and former software consultant, had a majority of just over 1,000 in 2005.CASTLE POINTThe Conservatives secured a majority of over 8,000 at the 2005 election in this Essex suburban and oil refinery seat. However, in 2008 the sitting MP Robert Spink quit the Tory Party and sits as an Independent. Mr Spink was thrown out of the party after allegedly having made threats following constituency attempts to deselect him. But right-winger Mr Spink claims that he was not ejected from the party but resigned.CEREDIGIONThis rural, Welsh-speaking Cardiganshire seat, created in 1536 when Henry VIII incorporated Wales within England, is that rare thing: a marginal as between the Liberal Democrats and Plaid Cymru. Other than a 12-vote by-election win in 1855, the Conservatives have never won this seat. The Liberal Democrat Mark Williams snatched the seat back from Plaid Cymru in 2005, but with a highly vulnerable majority of only 219. Williams, a former teacher, is the first non-Welsh speaker to hold this seat since the extension of the franchise in 1867.CHARNWOODThis constituency, named after the ancient forest of Charnwood, is now regarded as a Conservative stronghold. It lies between Leicester and Nottingham. At the last election, Stephen Dorrell, a former Tory Cabinet Minister, secured a majority over Labour of nearly 9,000. After serving as a minister in various portfolios and briefly as a front-bench spokesman on education and employment in Opposition, Dorrell has been a backbencher since 1998.CHATHAM AND AYLESFORDThis constituency was created in 1997 and is now a marginal as between Labour and the Conservatives. The main centre of population is the coastal town of Chatham, where Labour's strength lies. But the Conservatives, who will be fighting a majority of only 2,300, are hoping to take the seat, although boundary changes slightly favour Labour. The sitting MP is Jonathan Shaw, a former social worker. Chatham has historic links with the Royal Navy and the former dockyard area is a major tourist attraction. Nelson first went to sea from here.CHEADLEThis Greater Manchester seat was held by the Conservatives from 1970 to 2001 when the Liberal Democrats captured it from them. But the Conservatives have to overhaul a majority of well under 4,000 which could well be within their grasp. The sitting MP for this upmarket commuting belt constituency for Manchester is Mark Hunter, a former marketing executive for a newspaper group. He was elected at a by-election in 2005 caused by the death of his predecessor Patsy Calton only weeks after the general election.CHELMSFORDThere have been radical boundary changes to this part-rural, part-urban seat, but, like its predecessor, Chelmsford West, it should remain rock-solid Conservative. In 2005 in the old seat, Tories secured a massive majority of more than 18,000 over the Liberal Democrats with Labour miles behind them in third place. The sitting MP Simon Burns is best known for successfully piloting through a Bill to crack down on football hooligans.CHELSEA AND FULHAMThis is a new seat born out of the review of the constituency pairings of Hammersmith and Fulham and Kensington and Chelsea. This is the first time the seat will have been fought at a general election. It is largely an upmarket residential area and experts have calculated a notional Conservative majority of more than 10,000. The Conservative candidate is Greg Hands, the current MP for the disappearing constituency of Hammersmith and Fulham, where he secured a 5,000 majority over Labour. Norsheen Bhatti had been selected as the Liberal Democrat candidate, but she defected to the Conservatives in April 2009, arguing her then party leader Nick Clegg had abandoned his commitment to widen ethnic minority representation in British politics.CHELTENHAMThe Conservatives held this seat continuously from 1950 to 1992 when it was captured by the Liberal Democrats who have held it ever since. But with a majority of under 2,500, the Tories have marked this down as a winnable target seat. Cheltenham is a renowned spa town and is well known as an educational and business centre. The previous Liberal Democrat MP here - Nigel Jones, now in the House of Lords - was injured by a man who attacked him with a samurai sword. The sitting MP Martin Horwood, who entered Parliament in 2005, is a former marketing consultant.CHESHAM AND AMERSHAMThis is a blend of leafy Green Belt land with urban settings, an affluent stockbroker area – a virtually impregnable Conservative stronghold. The Liberal Democrats routinely come second in this constituency with Labour miles behind them. The sitting MP: Cheryl Gillan, shadow Welsh Secretary, a former marketing consultant and company director, first won the seat in 1992. She had a majority of nearly 14,000 last time.CHESTER, CITY OFThe Conservatives will be hoping to regain this seat which is now held by Labour but with a majority of under 1,000. This constituency, which was regarded as safe Tory, was won by Labour in 1997 and has remained in their hands ever since. The last Tory MP here was TV personality Gyles Brandreth, who won it in 1992 and lost it at the next election. In the mid 1800s, the seat was held by William Henry Gladstone, son of the former Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone. The seat comprises the medieval city of Chester, plus the partly industrial surrounds towards Ellesmere Port. The sitting MP Christine Russell, a Lincolnshire farmer's daughter, is a former Sheriff of Chester, and an ex-librarian.CHESTERFIELDThis seat was once a Labour stronghold, but is now a marginal between Labour and the Liberal Democrats. When the Liberal Democrats won it in 2001 - and again in 2005 - it became the first East Midlands seat the party has ever won. From 1984 until 2001 when he retired, the constituency was held by Tony Benn. This town, famous for its crooked spire, lies to the east of the Peak District and has continued to thrive despite the run-down of mining. The sitting MP Paul Holmes, a former teacher, is chairman of the parliamentary party. He had a majority of just over 3,000 last time.CHICHESTERThis seat, covering the western portion of West Sussex, is one of the oldest constituencies in the United Kingdom, having been created when commoners were first called to Parliament in the 13th century. It has been a Conservative stronghold for decades. The constituency includes what has been described as the "elegant" cathedral city of Chichester and its largely rural surrounds. The sitting MP, Andrew Tyrie, an economist and taxation expert, will be defending a majority of nearly 11,000.CHINGFORD AND WOODFORD GREENThis seat, to the north east of Central London, has been solidly Conservative since the start of the Thatcher era in 1979. It is noted for its famous MPs, including in its various forms, Winston Churchill and Norman Tebbit. It is now held by the former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith. At the last election, the swing to the Conservatives at 6.4% was over double the national swing. Mr Duncan Smith will be defending a majority of over 10,500. The seat has been described as a metropolitan Essex lower middle-class area with heavily owner-occupied housing.CHIPPENHAMThis is a new Wiltshire seat, but it has existed, paradoxically, in various forms since 1295. Wiltshire is currently represented by four Conservative MPs but this new fifth seat, consisting of Chippenham itself, Melksham and Bradford-on-Avon, could be won, according to experts, by the Liberal Democrats with a small majority over the Tories. The Liberal Democrat candidate is Duncan Hames, a local accountant. The Conservative candidate is Jamaica-born Wilfred Emmanuel-Jones, a businessman and founder of "The Black Farmer" range of food products.CHIPPING BARNETThis is a strongly Conservative seat which withstood the Labour landslide of 1997. It was created in 1974 from the former north London seat of Barnet. This is essentially an outer London middle-class commuting area. The seat, in its earlier form, was once held by Reginald Maudling, a Tory Chancellor of the Exchequer and Home Secretary. The present incumbent, Theresa Villiers, as shadow transport secretary, has shown herself to be one of the up-and-coming stars of the Tory front bench. She had a majority of almost 6,000 in 2005.CHORLEYThis marginal seat, which has changed hands between Labour and Conservative since 1945, has been reduced in size. It is another bellwether seat, often returning an MP of the governing party. The constituency includes a large Royal Ordnance factory, as well as the swanky homes of some Premiership footballers. The town of Chorley itself is the most Labour part of the seat; the countryside villages around being Tory. But the present incumbent, Labour's outspoken Lindsay Hoyle had a majority of over 7,500 last time.CHRISTCHURCHThis is regarded as the safest Tory seat in the West Country. The present incumbent, Christopher "Chopper" Chope, a former cost-cutting leader of London’s Wandsworth council, had a Tory majority of more than 15,000 last time, with the Liberal Democrats running second. In a shock by-election result in 1993, the Liberal Democrats snatched the seat from the Tories who won it back in 1997. This seaside constituency runs to the east and north of Bournemouth and contains some recently built suburbs, housing many pensioners. Mr Chope, a lawyer, in 1983 became the first Tory to represent the seat of Southampton Itchen. He lost it in 1992, but five years later was returned as MP for Christchurch.CITIES OF LONDON AND WESTMINSTERThe constituency covers the commercial, historical and tourist heart of London, including the Square Mile, St. Paul's Cathedral, Houses of Parliament, Trafalgar Square, Buckingham Palace and Hyde Park. Parts of the seat include some of Europe's wealthiest residential districts. Even during the Labour landslide of 1997, it returned a Conservative with a majority of several thousand. The last non-Conservative to represent the area was the economist John Stuart Mill. The present Tory MP, Mark Field had a majority of just over 8,000 in 2005. CLACTONThis is a new seat which the experts have predicted could produce a narrow Conservative majority. The Tory candidate will be the outspoken Douglas Carswell, current MP for the disappearing Harwich and Clacton constituency. His Labour opponent will be former MP Ivan Henderson who in 1997 became Harwich's first-ever Labour MP and was prominent in Treasury affairs. But he was defeated by Mr Carswell in 2005.CLEETHORPESThis is a marginal constituency between Labour and Conservatives. And the Tories, who lost it heavily in the Labour landslide of 1997, will be hoping to recapture it this time. Labour's majority of over 9,000 in 1997 has been whittled down to a little over 2,500, so Cleethorpes is regarded now as a Tory target seat. Shona McIsaac, the sitting MP is a former journalist, having worked on magazines such as Chat and Bella. The Tory challenger is Martin Vickers, her opponent last time. Vickers, a Grimsby councillor, was selected through an open primary. The seat comprises villages outside Grimsby, the seaside town of Cleethorpes, Brigg and Immingham with its heavy industry.CLWYD SOUTHThis scenic, rugged Welsh-speaking constituency in North Wales enjoys a reasonable Labour majority with no serious challenge from Plaid Cymru. It covers Llangollen, site of the international musical Eisteddfod. The sitting MP Martyn Jones, a microbiologist, has represented the area at Westminster since 1987. His campaign to save Welsh lager has culminated in a firm plan to resume production of this beer. CLWYD WESTThis is a highly marginal North Wales seat which the Conservatives gained last time with a shoestring majority of only 133. It has tended to be a Tory-held seat, but Labour captured it in both 1997 and 2001, although the Conservatives managed to regain it in 2005. The sitting MP in this seaside constituency in the Colwyn Bay area, is Llandudno solicitor David Jones.COATBRIDGE, CHRYSTON AND BELLSHILL This is probably as safe a Labour seat as you could find. Labour will be defending a majority of nearly 20,000 over the SNP, with the Conservatives nowhere in sight in fourth place last time. This was actually the largest numerical majority of any Westminster MP in 2005. This largely urban area was once, at least in part, a prosperous steel-making, coal-mining and iron works district, but is now with the disappearance of some of the heavy industry a scene of considerable deprivation. The sitting MP Tom Clarke has represented the area since 1982. He was the UK's first Minister for Films and has one of the best attendance records of any MP at Westminster.COLCHESTERThe seat has one of Britain's largest residential military populations, but the non-military vote in Colchester, an ancient but growing town, has been swinging in favour of the Liberal Democrats since 1997, when Bob Russell was elected with a small majority. Russell has increased both his total vote and percentage share in each of the succeeding elections. He increased his majority of 1,500 in 1997 to more than 6,000 now. This publicity conscious and invariably cheerful MP is a former sub-editor on the old London Evening News. Colchester, dating back to the start of Roman occupation soon after 43AD, claims to be England’s oldest recorded town. COLNE VALLEYThis is a three-way marginal West Yorkshire seat which has been held, at one time or another, by all three parties within the last 30 years. At the last election Labour's Kali Mountford secured a majority of only 1,500 over Tories. This constituency, the setting of Last of the Summer Wine, has been described as having the air of a Hovis TV commercial about it. It is a constituency of contrasts, stretching from the open stretches of the Peak District National Park to the concentrated urban outskirts of Huddersfield. Mountford, the sitting MP, a former civil servant, is regarded by commentators as "northern shrewd". CONGLETONThis prosperous Cheshire constituency has been held comfortably by the Tory Ann Winterton since its creation in 1983. Lady Winterton and her husband Sir Nicholas Winterton, MP for Macclesfield, have both announced they will be standing down at this election because of the "hectic" nature of parliamentary life. She has twice been in trouble with her party over delivering allegedly racist jokes. However, she bequeaths to her successor a Tory majority of over 8,000 at the last election.COPELANDThe nuclear industry, largely in the form of Sellafield, is dominant in this constituency where it employs thousands of people. The sitting Labour MP Jamie Reed is a supporter of nuclear power, a rarity among Labour ranks, but given the make-up of his constituency this is understandable. He is a former Sellafield press officer. The constituency includes Whitehaven and has numerous lakes and fells in its rural areas. Labour will be defending a majority of over 6,000 but this may be trimmed by boundary changes.CORBYThis is a highly marginal seat which Labour now hold by a whisker, a majority of only 1,500 over the Conservatives. This will be a seat the Tories must win if they are to form the next Government. Corby itself is the most Labour-voting area; with many still speaking with a Scottish accent after the migration of workers in the 1930s from Scotland to the town's former steelworks. The rest of the constituency consists of a number of smaller towns including Oundle - home of the famous public school - and the rural villages, and is mostly Conservative. The sitting MP Phil Hope, a former teacher, won the seat in 1997. He includes juggling among his recreations. The Tory candidate, Louise Bagshawe, has written 12 novels, including some best-sellers and has sold more than two million books world-wide.CORNWALL NORTHNorth Cornwall, on the Atlantic coast, is one of the most rural seats in England, and, although it has been in Conservative hands from time to time, it is traditionally a Liberal Democrat stronghold, probably because of its non-conformist religious leanings. The Liberal Democrats captured it from the Tories in 1992 and have held it ever since, but they now enjoy a vulnerable majority of about 3,000, making it a Conservative target seat. In 2005, Dan Rogerson, the sitting MP, used the Cornish language during the swearing of allegiance in Parliament to support the preservation of Cornish identity and culture. He is chairman of the all-party parliamentary group on cheese and once introduced, unsuccessfully, a Bill to create a devolved Cornish assembly.CORNWALL SOUTH EASTThe Liberal Democrats are confident that they will retain this seat which they captured from the Conservatives in 1997 and have held ever since. Colin Breed, the sitting MP, is a Methodist lay preacher and a former bank manager. Mr Breed, who is not contesting the seat this time bequeaths to his successor a majority over the Conservatives in this rural, picture-postcard constituency of just over 6,500, possibly reduced by boundary changes.COTSWOLDS, THEThis seat has the highest number of listed buildings of any constituency in the UK. The area is enormously popular with tourists, who enjoy the market towns constructed of beautiful Cotswold stone. Tourism overtook agriculture as the largest single employer in the area several years ago. The safe Tory seat now enjoys a majority of about 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats who traditionally are runners-up here. A number of former defence establishments are being closed down which will create opportunities for businesses of an environmentally friendly character. Cirencester is the principal town in this picturesque seat. The sitting MP Geoffrey Clifton-Brown is a former farmer/surveyor.COVENTRY NORTH EASTThis is a rock-solid Labour seat held by the Defence Secretary Bob Ainswsorth who at the last election secured a majority of more than 14,000 over the Conservative candidate. It is a no-hoper constituency for any party other than Labour. This is a highly industrial seat with much council housing. Mr Ainsworth is a former sheet-metal worker with Jaguar cars. He has long been derided for what his critics have described as his "comedy moustache".COVENTRY NORTH WESTThis busy urban seat, home of Jaguar cars, is represented by millionaire Geoffrey Robinson who has held it since 1976. At the start of the Tony Blair era, Robinson was appointed Paymaster General, but was forced to resign after 18 months after it was revealed that he had lent his government colleague Peter Mandelson £373,000 to buy a house. From 1996 to 2008 he was the owner of the New Statesman, the left-leaning weekly political magazine. It has been said that he never has any change in his pocket less than a £50 note. Before entering Parliament, he was chairman of Jaguar Cars. Labour, who enjoy a majority of about 9,000 should have little difficulty in retaining this seat.COVENTRY SOUTHThis seat, which includes Coventry city centre, is Labour-inclined but experts say that it is not beyond the grasp of the Conservatives. In addition to council estates, the constituency also includes some leafy suburbs and Warwick University campus. Labour at present enjoys a majority of just over 6,000 which the Tories say is not impregnable. The sitting Labour MP Jim Cunningham is an engineer who has been described as an orthodox trade union loyalist.CRAWLEYThis constituency, which includes Gatwick Airport, is the most marginal in the United Kingdom. At the last election, Labour scraped home with a majority of only 37 over the Conservatives. This is another seat which the Tories will have to win if they are to form the next government. It looked safely Labour after comfortable victories in 1997 and 2001, but the sometimes volatile nature of New Town voters, has made the seat highly marginal again. The seat is held by left-winger Laura Moffatt who was a state registered nurse at Crawley Hospital.CREWE AND NANTWICHThis constituency has always been regarded as safe Labour territory, that is until a by-election in 2008 saw the Conservatives destroy a Labour majority of 7,000 and transform it into a majority for them of nearly 8,000. The by-election was caused by the death of Gwyneth Dunwoody, a highly popular and effective Labour MP. Some say that Labour's shock defeat was in some way connected with the selection of her daughter Tamsin as the Labour candidate. This is a socially and politically divided seat with working-class Crewe contrasting with affluent Nantwich. Edward Timpson, the sitting MP, is a family lawyer and has run no fewer than seven marathons.CROYDON CENTRALThis is another desperately marginal seat which the Conservatives won in 2005 with a minute majority of only 75 over Labour. The constituency is regarded as a white-collar commercial and shopping centre in outer south London. Tory Andrew Pelling, an international investment banker, captured the seat from Labour in 2005. But after a police allegation of assault against him – no prosecution was ever pursued – the Tory whip was withdrawn and Pelling has been sitting as an Independent. Boundary change forecasts put the constituency narrowly back in the Labour camp.CROYDON NORTHThis outer-London urban sprawl, commuter belt seat, whose boundaries have been modified over the years, was once a safe-ish Conservative seat. But Malcolm Wicks became the first-ever Labour MP for this constituency in 1992 and now enjoys one of the highest Labour majorities in London, almost 14,000 – probably putting it beyond the reach of the Tories. Wicks, a former Energy Minister, was a Home Office civil servant before entering Parliament. He unsuccessfully fought the seat in 1987.CROYDON SOUTH The Tories should have no problems in retaining this outer London suburban seat, which contains a substantial proportion of middle-class voters. The present incumbent Richard Ottaway enjoys a majority of over 13,500, with Labour and Liberal Democrat fighting it out for second place. Ottaway, a solicitor, formerly represented Nottingham North. After losing that seat he successfully fought Croydon South and has been there ever since. He recently survived a constituency secret ballot called over his involvement in the expenses scandal.CUMBERNAULD, KILSYTH AND KIRKINTILLOCH EASTThis new town constituency north-east of Glasgow around the River Kelvin, is a rock-solid Labour seat which they held with a majority of 11,500 over the Scottish Nationalists last time, with the Tories pushed into fourth place. Rosemary McKenna, the present incumbent, a former primary school teacher, entered Parliament as one of the Blair Babes in 1997. She is fiercely pro-devolution. The name of this constituency, incidentally, is the longest, with 38 letters, in the current Parliament.CYNON VALLEYThis ex-mining constituency in South Wales, with its small valleys and high proportion of working class voters, is among the safest Labour seats in the country. At the last election, the doughty Ann Clwyd secured a majority of well over 13,000 over Plaid Cymru, with the Tories relegated to fourth place, claiming only 7.7% of the vote. Clwyd won the seat in 1983 and became the first woman to hold a Welsh valleys constituency. Before that she was a journalist and a Member of the European Parliament.DAGENHAM AND RAINHAMThis is a new seat in East London which Labour should have little difficulty in capturing. Experts have calculated a notional Labour majority in the region of 6,000. But this is also an area in which the British National Party have been active. The BNP secured 2,670 votes in the Dagenham constituency in 2005. Jon Cruddas, who has been Member for the disappearing seat of Dagenham since 2001, will be fighting this new constituency for Labour. He is a high profile back-bencher who was unsuccessful, although not by much, in his bid for the Labour Party deputy leadership some two years ago.DARLINGTONDarlington, the home and birthplace of the railways, also has a thriving heavy industry and engineering background. In "good" years for the Conservatives, the Tories have held this seat, but David Cameron's party have a mountain to climb if they are to snatch it from Labour this time round. Alan Milburn, the former Health Secretary, who resigned from the Cabinet so he could spend more time with his family, secured a Labour majority of more than 10,000 at the last election. Milburn, an enthusiastic Blairite, is not expected to contest the seat this time.DARTFORDThe Tories will be throwing their heavy artillery at this desperately marginal industrial Thames-side seat, at present held by Labour who retained it with a narrow 706 majority at the last election. It is a seat which the Conservatives feel they must win if they are to form the next government. Howard Stoate, the present Labour MP, recaptured it in 1997 from the Tories who had held it since 1979. Stoate, a general practitioner, carried on with his practice after becoming an MP. This was the seat unsuccessfully fought twice by Margaret Thatcher, then Margaret Roberts, in 1950 and 1951.DAVENTRYThis large rural west and south Northamptonshire constituency – reorganised by the Boundary Commission – is seen as a Conservative stronghold. Tim Boswell, who has represented the area since 1987 and is retiring this time, bequeaths a large majority to his successor. The new Conservative candidate is Chris Heaton-Harris, former East Midlands Conservative MEP, who was instrumental in bringing to public attention the fraud, mismanagement and waste within the European Commission and other European institutions. This seat has larger than the average number of voters in it.DELYNThis coastal Flintshire constituency with a mixed economy, is now seen as a comfortably safe Labour seat, although it has been won by the Conservatives in their "good" years, 1983 and 1987. The current Labour MP David Hanson won it back from the Tories in 1992 and has held it ever since. His majority last time was over 6,500. Hanson had previously worked for charities and was described as a pressure group campaigner.DENTON AND REDDISHThis is a safe Labour seat in eastern Greater Manchester which the party now hold with a majority of 13,500. Its traditional industries were cotton-spinning, hatting and engineering and these have largely now been replaced. There are large areas of terraced housing, including Manchester overspill areas. The present MP Andrew Gwynne entered Parliament at the 2005 general election.DERBY NORTHThis constituency covers a large residential area to the north of Derby city, including also rail and aero-engine factories, as well as some of the most affluent suburbs. But significant boundary changes have altered the political complexion of the constituency to such an extent that it appears winnable by any of the three main parties. The former constituency has been held by Labour since 1997, with a majority of 3,800 over the Conservatives at the last election. Before that it was Tory "property" from 1983, but even earlier, from 1970 it was in Labour hands for 13 years. The sitting MP, engineer Bob Laxton, once described as "one of Labour's rare proles" is not contesting this election.DERBY SOUTH,This constituency takes in the southern part of the city of Derby, including the city centre, as well as some of the more affluent suburbs and much of the Rolls Royce and railway engineering industry associated with Derby. There is also a substantial Asian population in this constituency. This seat has been constantly in Labour hands ever since – and indeed before – the war, although on at least one occasion the majority slipped into three figures. But the present incumbent, the former Foreign Secretary Margaret Beckett, earned a much healthier majority of over 5,500 at the last election with the Liberal Democrats as runners-up forcing the Conservatives, unusually, into third place. Before her political life began, Mrs Beckett worked as a metallurgist.DERBYSHIRE DALESThis is a new constituency comprising parts of Derbyshire West, Amber Valley and High Peak constituencies. Experts are calculating a Conservative majority here of anything up to 8,000. West Derbyshire constituency, which comprises the bulk of the new seat, was regarded as the only safe Tory seat in the county. The present incumbent and Tory candidate for the new seat Patrick McLoughlin, the Opposition chief whip, recorded a majority of nearly 11,000 at the last election. Mr McLoughlin, who has been described as "a man of action rather than philosophy", was a farmer and a miner before entering Parliament.DERBYSHIRE MIDThis is another new seat created as a result of boundary changes to the Erewash and Amber Valley constituencies, plus bits of Derby North and Derbyshire West. The seat, with a substantial residential complement, was first created in 1885 but abolished in 1918 and is now restored under its original name some 90 years later. Experts are looking to a Conservative victory here and have calculated that the notional Tory majority, if the seat had existed in 2005, would have been some 5,300.DERBYSHIRE NORTH EASTThis is a safe Labour seat and has been for years. It surrounds Chesterfield on three sides. This kidney-shaped constituency contains many former mining villages and despite some middle-class residential commuting areas for Sheffield which are Conservative leaning, there is little prospect that Labour will lose its grip on this seat. The sitting MP, Natascha Engel, who was born in Berlin of a German father and English mother, speaks English, German, Spanish and Portuguese and has worked as a technical translator. At the last election, Ms Engel secured a majority of over 10,000.DERBYSHIRE SOUTHThis semi-rural constituency, which has been in Labour hands since 1997, was created in 1832, abolished in 1950 and recreated in 1983 following boundary changes to other constituencies in the area. The current MP is Mark Todd, a Eurosceptic former public schoolboy. He has announced that he will not be contesting this election, but he bequeaths a Labour majority of 4,500 - possibly less after boundary changes - to his successor candidate. Todd entered Parliament in 1997 when he ousted Tory Edwina Currie from the seat.DEVIZESThis is a safe Conservative seat which has been in the party's hands since 1924. It is a typical Wiltshire farming constituency with downland and small towns. It includes Bulford camp part of the Army’s traditional estate on Salisbury Plain. The present incumbent, Michael Ancram, a former deputy leader of the Conservative Party, has announced he will not fight the next general election. But he bequeaths a majority of over 12,000 to his successor.DEVON CENTRALThis is a new seat which has a notional Conservative majority of just 2,300, so it is a highly marginal constituency. The new area is vast, covering around 700 sq. miles, from Buckfastleigh in the South, to beyond Okehampton in the West, to Bradninch in the East and up as far as Chawleigh in the North. It includes the valleys of the River Exe and the River Teign. DEVON EASTThis Conservative-held largely rural seat includes the towns of Sidmouth and Budleigh Salterton. There is a significant proportion of pensioners in this constituency, which should remain in Tory hands. The sitting Conservative MP, Old Etonian auctioneer Hugo Swire secured a majority of almost 8,000 at the last election. This former Grenadier Guards officer married the daughter of Sir John Nott, who was Defence Secretary during the Falklands conflict. Swire also once dated Jerry Hall.DEVON NORTHThis is a strong Liberal Democrat area, but the seat has been held by the Conservatives over recent years and the Tories will be fighting hard to regain it this time. This is a seaside and farming constituency around Barnstaple. It depends to a large extent on tourism and agriculture. The sitting MP Nick Harvey, a former communications consultant, recorded a Liberal Democrat majority of almost 5,000 over the Conservatives in 2005. This was the seat formerly held by the one-time Liberal Party leader Jeremy Thorpe who lost it to the Tories in 1979.DEVON SOUTH WESTThis is a safe Conservative seat which includes parts of the outskirts of Plymouth and is elsewhere rural and coastal. Apart from the Plymouth suburbs, the largest town is Ivybridge with a substantial residential area and light industrial development. South West Devon is regarded as one of the most picturesque constituencies in the country. Gary Streeter, the incumbent Tory MP, recorded a majority of more than 10,000 last time so his party should retain this seat without difficulty. Streeter, a solicitor, is a committed Christian who once set up and ran an evangelical church in Plymouth.DEVON WEST AND TORRIDGEThis is the largest seat in Devon and includes Dartmoor and a host of rural villages, plus towns like Bideford, Tavistock and Okehampton. It has received considerable boundary changes since the last election but is still regarded as a Conservative-Liberal Democrat marginal. The sitting Tory MP Geoffrey Cox captured it from the Liberal Democrats last time, but with a shaky majority of under 3,500. Mr Cox is a Queen's Counsel and has appeared in some celebrated cases.DEWSBURYThis seat, covering Dewsbury, Heckmondwike and Mirfield has returned a Labour MP at every election since 1935, except for the one 1983 election when it was won by a Conservative. However, it has never been regarded as impregnably Labour and boundary changes have given the Tories a better chance this time. The seat includes a substantial Muslim population and at the moment has a Muslim MP Shahid Malik. This is also a strong area for the British National Party which obtained their highest vote in Britain - 5,066 - at the last election. Labour will be defending a majority of about 4,000 over the Conservatives.DON VALLEYThis former coal-mining area has elected only Labour MPs since 1922. The present MP Caroline Flint had a majority of over 8,500 at the last election and there is virtually no prospect that the constituency will fall into any other hands. The outspoken Ms Flint created a furore when she flounced out as Europe Minister accusing Prime Minister Gordon Brown of treating women Cabinet members like "female window dressing".DONCASTER CENTRALThis is another safe Labour ex-mining seat where the sitting MP Rosie Winterton had a majority of about 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats last time. Last time the Tories were pushed into third place, but only a whisker behind the Lib Dems. Ms Winterton entered Parliament as one of the 1997 Blair Babes. She has held middle-rank ministerial posts. Before entering Parliament she worked for the Royal College of Nursing and also headed up John Prescott's office.DONCASTER NORTHThis constituency was created in 1983 when the former seat of Doncaster was split. It has returned a Labour MP consistently since then. The seat comprises part of the town of Doncaster and farmland to its north and north east. The sitting MP is Ed Miliband, Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change. He entered Parliament at the last general election and will be defending a Labour majority of some 12,500 this time. He and his brother David, the Foreign Secretary, are the first siblings to be Cabinet Members simultaneously since Austen and Neville Chamberlain.DORSET MID AND POOLE NORTHThis is strong – and growing stronger – Liberal Democrat territory. The party had a majority of 384 at the 2001 general election, when they captured it from the Conservatives. That majority soared to 5,482 last time. The constituency comprises part old-world Dorset villages and part modern suburbs. The sitting MP Annette Brooke is a former teacher and party whip. She helps run a business selling rocks and minerals.DORSET NORTHThis is a largely rural seat of rolling Dorset farmland with a clutch of small market towns within its boundaries including the elegant town of Shaftesbury. It can be regarded as a Conservative-Liberal Democrat marginal. The Tories held it last time but with a majority of well under 2,500 over the Lib Dems. The sitting MP is Swansea-born international banker Robert Walter.DORSET SOUTHThis is a Conservative-Labour marginal seat with a history of narrow majorities. The constituency comprises the seaside resort of Weymouth and the Portland naval base with their rural surrounds. It was one of the few seats in 2005 in which Labour actually increased its majority -- from 153 in 2001 to 1,812 last time. In both elections, the left-wing singer-songwriter Billy Bragg ran an anti-Conservative tactical voting campaign in this and other Dorset constituencies. The sitting MP is Work and Pensions Minister Jim Knight, a former theatre promoter and publisher.DORSET WESTThis is a mainly rural constituency whose coastline forms part of the Jurassic Park, a UNESCO world heritage site. It includes Bridport, Dorchester and Lyme Regis within its boundaries, as well as Tolpuddle, of Tolpuddle Martyrs fame. The Tories hold the seat now, but with the Liberal Democrats breathing heavily down their necks. The incumbent MP shadow cabinet member Old Etonian Oliver Letwin will go into this election defending a majority of below 2,500. Letwin has held a series of shadow cabinet posts, including shadow chancellor.DOVERThis has been a traditional Tory-Labour marginal, with Conservative-voting rural areas competing against mainly Labour-voting Dover itself, plus some ex-mining villages in the former Kent coalfield. Labour, which regained the seat from the Tories in 1997, held on very solidly in 2005, and, unusually, with virtually no swing from the previous General Election. The constituency comprises the towns of Dover – including the white cliffs – Deal and Walmer together with surrounding villages. The sitting MP Gwyn Prosser, a marine engineer, had a majority of about 5,000 in 2005.DOWN NORTHNorth Down, a north coast "well-heeled" seat is one of the most overwhelmingly Unionist parts of Northern Ireland, with nationalist parties routinely getting no more than 6% of the vote, if that. The constituency is the most prosperous in Northern Ireland and is widely considered to be the most similar to an English constituency. Traditionally levels of turnout in elections are low by Northern Ireland standards, possibly because the lack of a serious threat of a nationalist victory. The sitting MP university lecturer Ulster Unionist Sylvia Hermon, widow of Sir Jack Hermon who was chief constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary secured a majority of nearly 5,000 over the Democratic Unionist Party last time.DOWN SOUTHThis seat, which was once held by Enoch Powell, was once a Unionist stronghold, albeit with a substantial nationalist minority. But now it is in the hands of the moderate Social Democratic and Labour Party, which goes into this election with a majority of more than 9,000 over Sinn Fein. The constituency includes the beautiful Mountains of Mourne and fishing and ferry ports. The sitting MP Eddie McGrady, an accountant, entered Parliament in 1987 when he ousted Powell from the seat.DUDLEY NORTHThis urban seat on the edge of the Black Country should be a safe Labour area. Labour had a 5,500 majority over the Conservatives at the last election. This is also an area in which the British National Party has significant support. At the last election, its candidate polled more than 4,000 votes, which was only a handful fewer than the Liberal Democrats' haul. The sitting MP Ian Austin, once a journalist, is regarded as one of Gordon Brown's closest lieutenants. He was branded by the Tories as one of Labour's "boot boys" for his tendency to heckle.DUDLEY SOUTHThis generally Labour-safe constituency stretches from the rural fringe of the West Midlands at Wall Heath, Kingswinford and Wordsley, through Brierley Hill and Pensnett and up to Netherton and Woodside. It includes the giant Merry Hill Centre, one of Europe’s largest retail developments, and the adjoining Waterfront business area, home to major organisations like the Inland Revenue and the Child Support Agency. The anchor chain for the Titanic was made in the constituency. The sitting Labour MP Ian Pearson entered Parliament in 1994. He secured a 4,200 majority over the Conservatives in 2005.DULWICH AND WEST NORWOODThis South London suburban Labour seat, with a reasonably affluent middle-class population, has been held by Tessa Jowell, the "Olympics Minister" since it was created in 1997. She goes into this election with a majority approaching 9,000 over the Liberal Democrats, although experts calculate that boundary changes might have put Tories second last time. DUMFRIES AND GALLOWAYThis southern Scotland lowlands seat is regarded as the most agricultural constituency in Britain. The constituency includes the towns of Stranraer, Newton Stewart, Kirkcudbright and a major part of Dumfries itself. It is, at the moment, a Labour-held marginal with the Tories snapping at their heels, and with the Scottish Nationalists way behind them in third place. Russell Brown, the sitting MP, a former plant operative, will be defending a majority of under 3,000 at this election.DUMFRIESSHIRE, CLYDESDALE AND TWEEDDALEThis is a Conservative-Labour marginal, at present in the hands of the Tories. But Labour go into this election only 1,700 votes behind the Conservatives, so it promises to be a bitter battle. This Borders constituency, which covers some 2,000 square miles, is predominantly rural, and includes Gretna Green. The sitting MP David Mundell, is the only Tory representing a Scottish constituency in the House of Commons. David Cameron appointed him shadow Scottish Secretary.DUNBARTONSHIRE EASTThis seat is essentially a middle-class dormitory area north of Glasgow. It is at the moment Liberal Democrat held, but with Labour not far behind them. The Scottish Nationalists have also once held the seat but now they appear to be trailing badly behind the main parties. The sitting MP Jo Swinson will be defending a majority of around 4,000 – so it will be a hard-fought battle. Ms Swinson, a marketing manager, who in 2001 unsuccessfully fought Hull East, won Dunbartonshire East in 2005.DUNBARTONSHIRE WESTThis is a rock-solid Labour seat, with the Scottish Nationalists as runners-up and the Conservatives pushed into fourth place in 2005. The constituency comprises attractive hilly country west of Glasgow and includes the smart loch-side town of Helensburgh as well as some industry. Labour’s support centres on Dumbarton and the former shipyard town of Clydebank. The sitting MP veteran John McFall, a former teacher, is chairman of the powerful House of Commons Treasury Select Committee. Labour enters this election defending a majority of 12,500.DUNDEE EASTThis urban/suburban constituency is a battleground marginal seat between the Scottish Nationalists and Labour. At the moment it is in the SNP hands, but only by a whisker. In 2005, the Nationalists triumphed, but by only 343 votes over Labour. In 2001, Labour had won this seat narrowly, but after that boundary changes, which came into force in 2005, brought in many voters from suburban areas, formerly in the Angus constituency. The sitting SNP MP Stewart Hosie entered Parliament in 2005. Before that he was the party's national organisation convener and earlier the party's national secretary.DUNDEE WESTThis seat covers industrial Dundee, including the city centre, university and airport. It is now in Labour hands with the Scottish Nationalists the principal challengers and the rest of the parties barely in sight. However, the Nationalists have a big fight on their hands if they are to win this seat – they are facing a Labour majority of over 5,000. The sitting MP Jimmy McGovern, who entered Parliament in 2005, formerly worked as a glazier and then as a trade union official.DUNFERMLINE AND FIFE WESTThis supposedly rock-solid Labour seat astonishingly fell to the Liberal Democrats at a by-election in 2006. At the general election, the year before, Rachel Squire triumphed with a majority of 11,500 over the Lib Dems. She died the following year and at the subsequent by-election the Lib Dems overturned that majority and secured a majority of 1,800 for themselves. This is a mixed central belt town constituency which includes Rosyth docks. William Rennie, the sitting MP, is a former chief executive of the Scottish Liberal Democrats.DURHAM, CITY OFThis has all the appearances of being a safe if not impregnable Labour seat. Even so, at the last election the Liberal Democrat candidate improved on the party's vote by over 7,000 compared with the 2001 election. This is probably because the large student population in the city objected to Labour's top-up fees policy and the Iraq war. Nevertheless, Roberta Blackman-Woods retained the seat for Labour with a majority of over 3,200. Belfast-born Miss Blackman-Woods is a sociologist with an expertise in housing. She was selected from a controversial all-woman short list. Around the city itself, the constituency spreads to many villages, mostly former mining villages. There is also a strong rural and agricultural aspect to the constituency.DURHAM NORTHThis can fairly be described as a rock-solid Labour seat. The party retained it with a massive majority of approaching 17,000 at the last election over the Liberal Democrats, who pushed the Tories down a notch into third place. The seat covers Chester-le-Street and Washington New Town and the land in between. Chester-le-Street recently marked 100 years of unbroken Labour Party representation at Westminster. The constituency also includes the North of England Open Air Museum at Beamish. The sitting Labour MP Kevan Jones was senior organiser and political officer of the GMB union and one-time chairman of the Northern Region Labour Party.DURHAM NORTH WESTThis Labour stronghold has been held by Hilary Armstrong, the former Government chief whip, since 1987. She inherited the seat from her father Ernest Armstrong. In 2005, she secured a majority of more than 13,000 over the Liberal Democrats who, as in the neighbouring seat of Durham North, pushed the Conservatives into third place compared with the 2001 election. Ms Armstrong is a former lecturer and social worker. This is a hilly, ex-industrial and former mining constituency and includes the one-time steel town of Consett and the northern part of the Wear Valley.DWYFOR MEIRIONNYDDThis is a new constituency in North Wales bordered to the north by Arfon. It almost certainly favours Plaid Cymru. Experts calculated a notional majority of some nearly 9,000 for this party had this seat existed for the 2005 general election. The Tories have probably benefited from the boundary changes but the seat has been described as "Plaid Cymru to a man". The Plaid Cymru candidate is Elfyn Llwyd who sits for the disappearing seat of Meirionnydd Nant Conwy which, along with Caernarfon, helps to form the new constituency. Mr Llwyd is a lawyer who once played a part in a campaign to impeach Tony Blair over Iraq.EALING CENTRAL AND ACTONThis is a new constituency which, notionally, would have been a three-way marginal had it existed in 2005. Labour would have won it but by fewer than 1,000 votes over the Conservatives with the Liberal Democrats only a whisker behind the Tories. This constituency in west London, residential with light industry, will therefore be one of the key battlegrounds in the capital. It is a seat which the Tories must win if they are to achieve an overall working majority in the House of Commons. EALING NORTHThis West London seat, which has changed sides between Labour and Conservative several times since the war, is now in Labour's hands. Although it has been described as a marginal, the Labour candidate secured a healthy majority of over 6,000 over the Conservatives in 2005. Nevertheless, the Tories have this constituency in their sights as one of their target seats. Ealing North has a high Polish population. The sitting MP Stephen Pound, regarded as one of the wittiest MPs at Westminster, has in his time worked as a bus conductor, a seaman and a hospital porter.EALING SOUTHALL This Labour-held seat in West London and close to Heathrow Airport, has a substantial Asian population. Labour won it with a majority of nearly 11,500 over the Liberal Democrats in 2005. There followed, on the death of the sitting MP Piara Khabra, a contentious and ill-tempered by-election. Labour managed to hold on to the seat but with a majority slashed to just over 5,000 in a 12-cornered contest. The sitting MP Virendra Sharma, a former Mayor of Ealing, worked as a bus conductor when he arrived in Britain from India. He since worked for people with learning disabilities.EASINGTONThis north-east of England constituency of former mining traditions is ranked as the eighth safest Labour seat in the UK, and the third safest Labour seat in England, behind Knowsley and Liverpool Walton. The sitting MP former miner John Cummings has announced that he will not be fighting this election. He had a majority of more than 18,500 last time. This was for many years the constituency represented by that old Labour firebrand Manny, later Lord, Shinwell. In 1935 he ousted former Labour leader Ramsay Macdonald, who earlier split the party by forming a national government with Tories. EAST HAMThis is a safe Labour seat in the East End of London, with some dockland development. It has the largest proportion of non-white people in the UK; with a significant Asian population, many of whom are Muslims. As a result the Respect Coalition targeted it for the 2005 election, taking second place. But they were still more than 13,000 votes behind the Labour victors. The sitting MP Stephen Twigg, a Treasury minister and one-time mathematical analyst, has represented the constituency since 1994.EAST KILBRIDE, STRATHAVEN AND LESMAHAGOWThis seat which replaced the old East Kilbride and Clydesdale constituencies, was created in 2005. This safe Labour seat includes the large, and Scotland's most successful, new town East Kilbride, which grew from a rural Lanarkshire village in the last half of the 20th century. The constituency also enjoys a large complement of skilled workers. The sitting MP Adam Ingram, a former Defence Minister and computer programme analyst, secured a Labour majority of not far short of 15,000 at the last election, with the Scottish Nationalists runners-up.EAST LOTHIAN This coastal seat running south of Edinburgh towards Dunbar is regarded as safe Labour territory. At the last election, Labour secured a majority of more than 7,500 over the Liberal Democrats. In both that election and in 2001, the Scottish Nationalists were pushed into fourth place. The sitting MP Anne Moffat, a former nurse, and a member of a famous local family, and now divorced, campaigned at both those elections under her married name, Picking, to avoid confusion. But she has now reverted to her maiden name.EASTBOURNEThis South Coast seaside constituency, with a high population of pensioners, is now regarded as a marginal between the Conservatives and Liberal Democrats, even though, apart for one brief period, it has been in the Tories' hands consistently since 1910. The Liberal Democrats snatched it at a by-election in 1990 after the IRA assassination of Ian Gow, but it reverted to Tory in 1992. However, the Conservatives held it by a majority of only 1,100 over the Liberal Democrats in 2005. The Liberal Democrats have targeted this seat and promise to give the sitting Tory MP lawyer Nigel Waterson a tough fight.EASTLEIGHEastleigh was a fairly safe seat for the Conservatives for nearly 40 years until the accidental death of its then MP, former journalist Stephen Milligan, in 1994. At the subsequent by-election, the Liberal Democrats gained the seat on a very large swing, and have since held it in the three following elections, though with somewhat narrow majorities. This seat of suburbs includes the airport and rail works outside Southampton. The Tories will be fighting hard to regain this seat which, at the last election, the Liberal Democrat Chris Huhne held with a majority of only 568 over the Tories. Mr Huhne, who speaks in the Commons on home affairs, has twice challenged for the party leadership, even though he entered Parliament only at the last election.EDDISBURYThis mostly rural constituency covers the south-west of Cheshire. It was re-created in 1983 and has been represented by the Conservatives ever since. Half the electorate live in the rock salt mining town of Winsford with significant housing relocations from Liverpool and Manchester in the 1970s, together with extensive dairy based farming between Crewe and Chester running to Welsh border. The sitting Tory MP, lawyer and management consultant Stephen O'Brien, retained the seat at the last election with a majority of just under 6,200 over Labour.EDINBURGH EASTThus urban, commuter constituency has been comfortably in Labour's hands for several decades, but lately the party's majority has been reduced. Even so the party goes into the next election to defend a majority of more than 6,000 over the Liberal Democrats, with the Scottish Nationalists in third place. The sitting Labour MP Dr Gavin Strang has represented the area since 1970. After 2005 he became Scotland's longest-serving MP. He is standing down at this election.EDINBURGH NORTH AND LEITHThis former Labour stronghold suddenly turned into a Labour/Liberal Democrat marginal at the last general election. Labour's majorities of nearly 11,000 in 1997 and nearly 9,000 in 2001, suddenly dropped to just over 2,000 in 2005. The constituency includes the Edinburgh Playhouse, the Edinburgh Waterfront, the Royal Botanical Gardens, the Western General Hospital and the private schools of Fettes College, the Edinburgh Academy, The Mary Erskine School and Stewart's Melville College and Telford College. The constituency is expected to experience rapid population growth and demographic change over the next six years. It is a pairing of smart Edinburgh New Town and port development. The sitting MP Mark Lazarowicz, a lawyer, first represented the seat in 2001.EDINBURGH SOUTHThis largely suburban Edinburgh seat, covering the elegant south side of the city, has become a top target for both the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives against Labour, the current holders. At the last election Labour clung on with a majority of just 405 over the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives not far behind them, and the Scottish Nationalists fourth, a long way behind the Tories. The sitting MP Nigel Griffiths entered Parliament in 1987 and has represented this seat ever since. He has held various front-bench posts.EDINBURGH SOUTH WESTThis constituency, very much Labour inclined, was created in 2005 and has an urban north east, a suburban centre, including a number of housing estates, with the remainder being rural. The sitting MP is the Chancellor Alistair Darling who goes into this election to defend a majority over the Conservatives of some 7,000. Mr Darling formerly represented Edinburgh Central, a constituency which no longer exists.EDINBURGH WESTThis commuter belt constituency, distinctively in the city, was a safe Unionist/Conservative seat for over 65 years, from 1931 until 1997 when it was taken by the Liberal Democrats who have held it ever since. At the last election the Lib Dems recorded a majority of 13,600 over the Conservatives with Labour only a whisker behind in third place. The Nationalists came fourth, a long way behind the first three. The sitting MP company director John Barrett, who entered Parliament in 2001, is not standing this time. This is the Lib Dems’ second safest seat in the country. It includes Edinburgh Airport within its boundaries.EDMONTONThis outer London constituency bordering the River Lea has been a safe Labour seat, with an odd hiccup, since 1935. The Tories captured it in 1983, but it returned to Labour in 1997 and has been in their hands ever since. The sitting MP Andy Love, a former parliamentary officer, retained the seat for Labour with a majority of over 8,000 in 2005. Demographically, the constituency has a diverse and culturally mixed population with significant Turkish speaking, Greek Cypriot, Bangladeshi, African and Afro-Caribbean communities.ELLESMERE PORT AND NESTONThe Labour-held constituency includes the industrial town of Ellesmere Port, the smaller residential town of Neston and outlying villages. It is tucked away between the Rivers Dee and Mersey at end of the Wirral and dominated by an oil refinery and the Vauxhall factory This was formerly a Conservative seat, but Labour captured it in 1992 and have held it ever since. The sitting MP Andrew Miller, a former trade union official, entered Parliament in 1992 and had a majority of 6,500 last time.ELMET AND ROTHWELLThis is a new seat in Yorkshire which is being fought for the first time. It is made up largely from the disappearing seat of Elmet which was Labour held. Experts have calculated that had the new seat been in existence in 2005, then Labour would have won it with a convincing majority of more than 6,000 over the Conservatives. Even so Wetherby and Harewood are considered strong Tory areas in this constituency. And the Liberal Democrats believe the presence of Rothwell will favour them. Colin Burgon, the sitting MP for Elmet, is not contesting this election.ELTHAMThis south-east London seat was held by Tory Peter Bottomley for two decades before he transferred to another constituency. And in 1997, Labour captured it from the Conservatives and have held it ever since. The area is famous as the birthplace of Bob Hope, and infamous, as the place where the black teenager Stephen Lawrence was murdered. The seat is largely middle-class and suburban. The sitting MP, former London taxi-driver Clive Efford, secured a Labour majority of over 3,200 at the last general election. It is listed as the 66th most likely seat that the Tories could capture.ENFIELD NORTHThe Conservatives will be hoping to recapture this seat just to the north of London, held at the moment by Labour but with a majority of only 1,900. It will be one constituency the Tories must win if they are to have a working majority – or even a majority at all – after the election. The seat runs into the Green Belt around Enfield Chase. The sitting MP Joan Ryan entered Parliament in 1997 as one of the Blair Babes and has held the seat ever since. On paper boundary changes would just push the constituency into the Tory camp.ENFIELD SOUTHGATEThis is a North London commuter belt seat regarded as a marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. At the moment it is Tory-held but with a majority of only 1,700 over Labour last time – so it is truly up for grabs. The constituency is in a Green Belt and only one-third of it is built on. The sitting MP David Burrowes, a solicitor, entered Parliament in 2005. This was the seat which famously rejected Michael Portillo, then a Cabinet Minister, in 1997, but which the Tories have since regained from Labour.EPPING FORESTThis now appears to be safe Tory territory, although in the recent past Labour had been picking up although not by enough to win. But, surprisingly, in 2005, the Conservatives swept in with a majority of nearly 14,500 over Labour. The seat, on the north-eastern tip of London, comprises smart metropolitan Essex suburbs around Loughton, Chigwell and Theydon Bois. The sitting MP is Scottish lawyer Eleanor Laing. She entered Parliament in 1997. Winston Churchill represented what is now part of this seat when he was Prime Minister during the Second World War.EPSOM AND EWELLIn Westminster terms, Epsom and Ewell is one of the strongest Conservative areas in the country, even though the borough council is run by the local Residents' Association. Commentators have said there would have to be an apocalyptic parliamentary election for the Tories to lose it. This Inner Surrey commuter belt area has a substantial population of managerial and affluent voters. It also includes the famous racecourse. At the last election Tory Chris Grayling recorded a majority of almost 16,500 over the Liberal Democrats. Mr Grayling, once a journalist and an ex-Member of the Social Democrat Party, entered Parliament in 2001. He claims to have hit a four off the bowling of the fearsome Australian test cricketer Dennis Lillee.EREWASHThis Derbyshire seat includes the towns of Long Eaton and Ilkeston in an area which is neither wealthy nor poor. It has the classic makings of a marginal seat, but Labour, which captured it from the Conservatives in 1997 and have held it ever since, now enjoy a majority over the Tories of just over 7,000. However, the Conservatives are mounting a huge campaign here to regain the seat. The sitting MP Liz Blackman is a former head teacher.ERITH AND THAMESMEADThis rock-solid Labour seat covers the area close to the border of south-east London, stretching from Plumstead in the west to Erith in the east. This constituency has problems over housing and crime. The sitting Labour MP John Austin, who recorded a majority of 11,500 over the Conservatives at the last election, is not contesting this one. Mr Austin, a technician, has held the seat since it was created in 1997. ESHER AND WALTONThis is a small but wealthy Thameside area to the north of Surrey and bordering Greater London. It forms part of the so-called stockbroker belt. The Conservatives retained it at the last election with a majority of more than 7,500 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP Ian Taylor, a businessman and strongly pro-European, is standing down at this election.EXETERThis constituency, dominated by Devon's prosperous county town, a market and commercial area, is centred on the University of Exeter and has a high student population, but is otherwise regarded as fairly affluent and middle-class. Although, over the years, it has a history of having been more Conservative than Labour, it is at the moment held by Labour which recorded a majority of more than 7,500 at the last election. The sitting MP is former journalist Ben Bradshaw, Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport.FALKIRKThis seat to the south of the River Forth and dominated by this industrial central belt town, is regarded as impregnable Labour territory with the Scottish Nationalists, although runners-up last time, still a long way behind. The sitting MP Eric Joyce recorded a majority of nearly 13,500 at the last election. Mr Joyce, a former soldier in the Black Watch, entered Parliament in 2000 at a by-election in the now extinct seat of Falkirk West.FAREHAMFareham, a rock-solid Tory constituency, is on the South-East Hampshire coast. The western boundary of the constituency is the Solent and the River Hamble, one of the foremost sailing centres of the country. To the east, the boundary is Portsmouth Harbour. Fareham has always had, and still does, strong naval connections - it is home to naval personnel based in Portsmouth and surrounding areas. The Ministry of Defence is a major customer for many local businesses. Mark Hoban, the sitting MP, entered Parliament in 2001 and at the last election recorded a Tory majority of 11,700 over Labour. He is a chartered accountant and reputedly a "dab hand in the kitchen".FAVERSHAM AND KENT MIDThis Kent seat which borders Maidstone has undergone considerable boundary changes, but experts believe that if it had existed in this form in 2005, the Tories would have won it with a majority of almost 9,000. In the constituency of the same name in 2005, the Tories registered a majority of 8,700 over Labour. The sitting Tory MP Hugh Robertson is a former army officer. He commanded the Household Cavalry on the 1993 Queen's Birthday Parade. The area, covering the town of Faversham and several villages, also includes Leeds Castle – used by the Government as a conference centre. FELTHAM AND HESTONThis Labour-held white-collar constituency covers the western end of the London Borough of Hounslow, and lies to the south and east of Heathrow Airport where a lot of local constituents are employed. The sitting Labour MP Alan Keen registered a 6,820 majority over the Conservatives at the last election. Mr Keen who was once a part-time tactical scout for Middlesbrough FC, has been described as "low-profile husband of high-profile wife" - also an MP.FERMANAGH AND SOUTH TYRONEPerhaps because of the precarious balance between the Nationalist and Unionist communities, Fermanagh and South Tyrone has repeatedly had the highest turn-out of any constituency in Northern Ireland. At the moment it is in the hands of Sinn Fein which recorded a majority of 4,500 over the Democratic Unionists. This is a farming seat on the border with the Irish Republic. It was once, briefly, held by the IRA hunger striker Bobby Sands. The present Sinn Fein MP Michelle Gildernew, like her colleagues in the party, does not take her seat in the Commons.FIFE NORTH EASTThis current Liberal Democrat stronghold has the River Tay on its northern coast, and the Firth of Forth to the south. It also includes the famous golf and university town of St Andrews. At the last election, the Liberal Democrat candidate, Sir Menzies Campbell, a former party leader, secured a majority of over 12,500 over the Conservatives. FILTON AND BRADLEY STOKEThis is a new seat in South Gloucestershire which the pundits regard as a three-cornered marginal. They have calculated that had it existed in 2005, the Conservatives would have won it with a majority of just 653 over Labour, with the Liberal Democrats in hot pursuit just behind. The constituency is made up of parts from Bristol North West, Northavon and Kingswood. It includes the Filton plant of defence and aerospace giant BAE Systems where supersonic airliner Concorde was built.FINCHLEY AND GOLDERS GREENThis North London seat has become a cliff-hanging marginal. At the last election, Labour beat the Conservatives by a margin of only 741. The Tories will expect to regain this seat if they are to form a Government after this election and boundary changes are likely to help them. Rudi Vis, the sitting MP, is not contesting this election. This area, when the constituency was known simply as Finchley, was famously represented by Margaret Thatcher from 1959 until 1992.FOLKESTONE AND HYTHEThis South Coast seaside constituency is regarded as safe Tory territory. The current MP, Michael Howard, former Home Secretary and ex-Leader of the Opposition, will not be contesting this election. But his successor will inherit a majority at the last election of about 11,680 over the Liberal Democrats. The constituency includes the major Channel port of Folkestone and Hythe seaside town.FOREST OF DEANThis is a classic marginal seat which the Tories captured from Labour in 2005, but with a majority of only just over 2,000, so it promises to be the scene of one of the toughest battles in the whole of the UK. The core of the constituency consists of the Royal Forest of Dean itself, which was established by William the Conqueror nearly a thousand years ago and is one of the last surviving Royal Forests in England. The area has a rich industrial and mining history. The sitting MP Mark Harper, who unsuccessfully fought the seat in 2001, is a chartered accountant.FOYLEThis Northern Ireland seat, which has an overwhelmingly Nationalist population, covers the city of Londonderry. The constituency is called Foyle to avoid use of the contentious alternative names: Derry and Londonderry. It has been in the hands of the Social Democratic and Labour Party for some decades now. For years it was represented by party founder John Hume until his retirement before the 2005 election. But his successor Mark Durkan retained the seat for his party despite a strong challenge from Sinn Fein. The SDLP goes into this election with a majority of nearly 6,000. Mr Durkan was a parliamentary assistant to Mr Hume.FYLDEThis is a seaside constituency in the North West, a Conservative stronghold which includes the genteel resorts of Lytham and St Anne's, favoured by families and retired people. The Fylde is a rich green plain stretching from beaches and sand dunes across several championship golf courses and acres of gently rolling, unspoilt rural countryside, onward toward the foothills of the Pennines. At the last election, the Tories sailed home with a majority of some 12,500 over Labour. The sitting MP Michael Jack is retiring after two decades. GAINSBOROUGHThis is a safe Tory seat in Lincolnshire with Labour and the Liberal Democrats regularly battling it out for second place. Historically, Gainsborough is the "capital that never was". Sweyn Forkbeard based himself at Gainsborough after gaining the kingship in late 1013. The constituency comprises flat farming land north of Lincoln, plus the Lincolnshire Wolds. The sitting MP, Edward Leigh, who retained the seat for the Conservatives at the last election with a majority of just over 8,000 over the Liberal Democrats, is chairman of the Commons Public Accounts Committee, one of the most influential posts at Westminster.GARSTON AND HALEWOODThis is a new urban Merseyside constituency which includes much of the disappearing Liverpool Garston seat, and parts of the Knowsley South constituency. Experts say that if this seat had existed at the last general election, Labour would have romped home with a majority of nearly 11,000 – so it can safely be regarded as a Labour stronghold. Labour won the Liverpool Garston seat in 2005 with a majority of nearly 7,200 over Liberal Democrats. Its sitting MP Maria Eagle, a solicitor, entered Parliament in 1997 to join her twin sister Angela. Maria has played chess for England as well as being a useful cricketer. The new constituency includes Halewood car plant and Liverpool’s John Lennon Airport. GATESHEADThis is a new Parliamentary seat in the north east, which will almost certainly be a Labour stronghold. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the last general election, Labour would have won with a huge 14,000-plus majority. The electoral wards of this constituency are entirely within the Gateshead town boundaries. The Labour candidate is David Clelland who at present sits for Tyne Bridge which disappears under boundary changes. Mr Clelland, an electrician, once told a disgruntled constituent: "I do not want your vote so you can stick it where it best pleases you."GEDLINGThis seat covers the mainly affluent north eastern suburbs of the Nottingham area and is mostly middle-class and residential. It is now Labour-held but is considered a marginal, with the Tories regarding it as a target seat which they will need to win if they are to form a government after the general election. Labour beat the Tories by 3,800 last time. The sitting Labour MP Vernon Coaker has carried out much work for UNICEF and has travelled to many of the world's trouble spots on their behalf.GILLINGHAM AND RAINHAMThis is a new constituency, an enlarged version of the disappearing Gillingham seat. It is entirely in Medway Borough – and it threatens to be a cliff-hanging marginal between Labour and Conservative. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the 2005 general election, Labour would have scraped home by a mere 15 votes. As it was, Labour’s Paul Clark secured the Gillingham seat last time with a majority over the Conservatives of 254 votes.GLASGOW CENTRALThis constituency, which straddles the River Clyde and includes the newly refurbished Gorbals, has the largest ethnic minority population of any of the seven Glasgow seats. The sitting MP is Mohammad Sarwar, a millionaire businessman, who was the first Muslim to be elected to the Westminster Parliament. It is a Labour stronghold with a majority of 8,531 over the Liberal Democrats last time on a low turn-out. Sarwar is retiring at this election and his successor as the Labour candidate is his son, Anas Sarwar, a Paisley dentist.GLASGOW EASTGlasgow East was always regarded as a safe – indeed impregnable – Labour seat, that is until the Scottish Nationalist sensationally captured it at a by-election in 2008. This was caused by the resignation, through ill-health, of the sitting Labour MP David Marshall, who had recorded a majority of 13,500 - the party's third highest majority in Scotland - over the Scottish Nationalists in 2005. But at the by-election, the SNP’s John Mason astonishingly snatched the seat from Labour, winning by a margin of 365 votes. This constituency has some of the worst social deprivation of anywhere in the UK, and the life expectancy here is significantly less than elsewhere in the country. The area is targeted for widespread improvements which could provide 21,000 new jobs.GLASGOW NORTHThis working-class constituency, which includes Glasgow University, should be Labour territory. At the last election Labour held on to it with a majority of 3,338 over the Liberal Democrats, but that was on a relatively low turn-out. Ann McKechin, a solicitor, the sitting Labour MP, had previously represented Glasgow Maryhill until that constituency was abolished and Glasgow North was created for the last election. GLASGOW NORTH EASTThis working-class constituency is a traditional Labour stronghold. It was the seat formerly held by the last Speaker Michael Martin, who was previously a Labour MP. By convention, the Speaker's seat was not contested by Labour , Conservatives or Liberal Democrats in 2005. Mr Martin won with a 10,000-plus majority over SNP. When he quit the Speaker's chair in 2009, the by-election - with 13 candidates - produced an unexpectedly large Labour majority of 8,111. But the turnout, 33.2%, was the lowest in Scottish history. The sitting MP William Bain is a public law lecturer.GLASGOW NORTH WESTThis seat, covering the outer suburbs of Glasgow, is another safe Labour constituency. The current MP John Robertson, a British Telecom manager, entered Parliament in 2000 at a by-election caused by the death of former Scottish Secretary Donald Dewar, and retained this constituency in 2005 with a majority of more than 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats.GLASGOW SOUTHYet another safe Labour seat which, at the last general election, was retained by Labour with a majority of 10,800 over the Liberal Democrats, with the Tories pushed into fourth place, marginally behind the Scottish Nationalists. This constituency runs from Glasgow city centre to the southern outskirts around Hampden Park. The sitting MP Tom Harris is a former journalist and public relations man.GLASGOW SOUTH WESTThis constituency comprises sprawling housing estates, and is hit by high crime and unemployment levels. This, too, is a Labour stronghold which seems to be beyond the reach of any of the other parties. At the last election, the Labour candidate, Ian Davidson sailed home with a majority of nearly 14,000 over the Scottish Nationalists. Mr Davidson, who entered Parliament in 1992, is a vociferous critic of the monarchy and is a supporter of Republic, a campaign to replace the monarchy with an elected head of state.GLENROTHESThis seat, created for the 2005 general election, is strongly Labour, but with a determined challenge from the Scottish Nationalists. Labour won it with a majority of 10,600 over the SNP in 2005, but at the subsequent by-election in 2008 - caused by the death of the sitting MP John MacDougall - that was cut to 6,700, even though Labour increased their own vote marginally. The SNP vote increased by over 4,000. The sitting MP Lindsay Roy is one of Scotland's most respected head teachers. His victory was a relief to Labour only months after defeat at the Glasgow East by-election. GLOUCESTERThis constituency has developed into a marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. It had been in Conservative hands for three decades, but it has been Labour "property" since 1997 – and is now one of the Tories' principal target seats for this election. The sitting MP Parmjit Dhanda retained it for Labour last time with a 4,200 majority over the Conservatives. It is an area of diverse industry, including a huge ice-cream factory and a mixture of council and private housing. Dhanda, a former party and union organiser, has been described as "slick, professional and with the common touch".GORDONThis seat must have been the nearest thing there was to a Liberal Democrat stronghold. At the last election the party easily retained Gordon with a majority of 11,000 over Labour. The sitting MP Malcolm Bruce has steadily increased his party's majority over the years from 1983 when - as a Liberal candidate - he scraped home by only 850 votes. However the fly in the ointment is SNP leader Alex Salmond who won the smaller Scottish Parliament constituency of the same name in 2007 though he will not be standing for the Westminster seat. The constituency covers the central section of Aberdeenshire and the northern portion of Aberdeen city. The constituency has altered radically to accommodate a huge growth in population as a result of the region's oil interests. Bruce is a former leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats and is now its president.GOSPORTThis South Coast Hampshire constituency is regarded as safe Tory territory, although it includes some stark social divisions, notably the large council estate of Rowner, reputedly one of the most deprived areas in the United Kingdom. But the presence of the Royal Naval base is helpful to the Tories. Sir Peter Viggers, a qualified jet pilot, lawyer and banker, is retiring at this election after the disclosure that he claimed for a duck house during the expenses row. Sir Peter, who was a Tory MP for 25 years, acquired a reputation of correctly predicting the dates of future general elections. He secured a majority of 5,700 for the Tories at the last election.GOWERThis South Wales seat has elected only Labour MPs since 1906, among the longest runs of any constituency in the country. It is really a no-hoper for any party other than Labour, although Labour's recent majorities have not been "mega". At the last election, Labour triumphed with a majority of 6,703 over the Tories. The constituency comprises the old fishing village and seaside resort of Mumbles, and includes the first Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty in Britain. To the north, the constituency has a rich industrial history, grounded in coal and steel. The sitting MP Martin Caton entered Parliament in 1997 and has held the seat ever since. He is an agriculture researcher.GRANTHAM AND STAMFORDThis is a Conservative-held seat whose MP Quentin Davies defected to Labour in 2007, provoking huge anger in the constituency. This is a mainly rural constituency of small Lincolnshire towns including the historic Stamford. In his letter of resignation from the party, Davies told Mr Cameron: "Under your leadership the Conservative Party appears to me to have ceased collectively to believe in anything, or to stand for anything. It has no bedrock. It exists on shifting sands." Grantham is the birthplace of Margaret Thatcher.GRAVESHAMThis presently Tory-held marginal seat, which includes the town of Gravesend, and surrounding villages, has been regarded as a bellwether constituency having voted for the winning party in every election since 1951, except 2005. At that election the Tory Adam Holloway regained the seat from Labour's Chris Pond with a majority of just 654 votes – so it is a close one to call. Holloway is a former Grenadier Guards officer and ITN investigative reporter.GREAT GRIMSBYGreat Grimsby, which was first recognised as a parliamentary seat in 1295, is a constituency which stands between the Humber and the North Sea, centred on Grimsby itself, famous as a seaport and for its fish. It has been in Labour hands for decades. The present MP, Austin Mitchell, a former journalist and TV commentator, and acid critic of New Labour, first won it in a by-election in 1977, but with a majority of only 520, and has held it ever since. Last time he had a majority over the Conservatives of some 7,600.GREAT YARMOUTHThis is a seaside constituency in Norfolk centred on the resort of Yarmouth. But although it is largely rural, there is a substantial amount of industry in the town. It is now in Labour hands, but with a majority in 2005 of just over 3,000, it could easily fall into the hands of the Conservatives this time. The sitting Labour MP Anthony Wright, an engineer, won the seat in 1997 and has held it ever since.GREENWICH AND WOOLWICHThe South London seat of Greenwich was a Labour stronghold for much of the 20th century. But it surprisingly fell to the Social Democratic Party at a by-election in 1987. Labour won it back, although with difficulty in 1992, and have retained it, since 1997, in its new form of Greenwich and Woolwich . The sitting MP is Nick Raynsford, a public school educated former minister with a precise legal brain. At the last election he recorded a majority of more than 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats. This constituency is the home of the Millennium Dome, now known as the 02 arena.GUILDFORDThis Surrey seat is a cliff-hanging marginal between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. At the last election, the Conservatives snatched it back from the Liberal Democrats but with a flimsy majority of only 347. It is, understandably, one of the Lib Dems' target seats this time. Guildford is not just a satellite town for London, 30 miles away, but has its own thriving local economy. The constituency includes Surrey University which, combined with its research park, brings in at least £550 million a year to the local economy. The sitting MP Anne Milton is a trained nurse who has worked for the National Health Service for 25 years.HACKNEY NORTH AND STOKE NEWINGTONThis North London constituency represents one of the most deprived areas in the capital. There is little prospect of any other party snatching it from Labour. The sitting MP Diane Abbott became, in 1987, the first black woman to be elected to the House of Commons, and she remained the only one for ten years. At the last election she recorded a majority of well over 7,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Ms Abbott is well-known as a TV pundit, particularly for her regular late-night appearances with Michael Portillo, the former Tory Cabinet Minister, discussing the political issues of the day.HACKNEY SOUTH AND SHOREDITCHThis busy London constituency, which reportedly suffers from "intemperate local politics" is, even in "bad" years, a safe Labour seat. The sitting MP Meg Hillier retained it for Labour at the last election with a majority of more than 10,000 and it is unlikely that she will face a serious challenge this time. Ms Hillier was, at the age of 29, Islington's youngest ever mayor. Her predecessor in this seat, Brian Sedgemore, defected to the Liberal Democrats. The area became a refuge for Huguenots, fleeing in the 17th century from the France of Louise XIV. It borders on the East End’s large Victoria Park. HALESOWEN AND ROWLEY REGISThis seat comprises these two "twin" West Midland towns. It has a mixed political heritage and has its prosperous and industrial working-class areas. The constituency was created in 1997 and has been in Labour's hands since then. But Labour go into this election with a majority of something over 4,000 to defend – so they will have a fight on their hands to keep the Tories at bay. The sitting MP Sylvia Heal, who has represented the seat since its creation, has been a Deputy Speaker since 2000. She formerly sat for Mid-Staffordshire, which she won in a by-election in 1990, but was defeated in 1992.HALIFAXThis Yorkshire seat, comprising this industrial and commercial town in the Calder Valley west of Bradford, is now in Labour hands, but has swapped between Labour and Conservative many times over the years. At the last election Labour had a majority of 3,417 which must be regarded as vulnerable in the current climate. The Tories have it well and truly targeted. The sitting MP Halifax-born Linda Riordan is a member of the Socialist Campaign Group and has more than once rebelled against the party leadership.HALTEMPRICE AND HOWDENThis East Yorkshire seat is held by the Conservatives with a majority of 15,355 registered at a by-election in 2008. But the scale of this majority could be misleading. The by-election was caused by the resignation of the, then, shadow home secretary David Davis to draw attention to the "detention without trial" issue. He secured 17,113 votes, but none of the other 25 candidates could reach even 2,000. At the last general election, the Tories secured a majority of 5,000-plus, which is probably a more realistic guide. The main challenger then was Liberal Democrats. The constituency ranges from the historic town of Howden to the Hull dormitory areas of Cottingham and Willerby.  HALTONThis is a rock-solid Labour seat which sits on either side of the River Mersey, and includes Widnes and Runcorn within its boundaries as well as big chemical plants. At the moment, Labour hold the seat with a majority of over 14,500. The sitting MP Widnes-born Derek Twigg has held the seat for Labour since 1997. Before entering Parliament he was a political consultant.HAMMERSMITHThis is a new West London constituency following substantial boundary changes. Experts have calculated that if this seat had been in existence in 2005, Labour would have won it with a majority of something over 3,600 – so the Tories will regard this seat as a winnable marginal. Andrew Slaughter is the sitting Labour MP for the existing constituency of Ealing, Acton and Shepherd's Bush. He is a barrister specialising in criminal and housing law, and a former leader of the London Borough of Hammersmith and Fulham Council. The new constituency covers the northern part of that borough, including working class Shepherd’s Bush and more genteel West Kensington.. HAMPSHIRE EASTThis upmarket rural seat dominated by the towns of Alton and Petersfield, is a safe Conservative haven. It was created in 1983 and has had only one MP since then, Michael Mates, who is retiring at this general election. He had a majority over the Liberal Democrats of 5,500 at the last general election. Before entering Parliament he served in the army for 20 years, reaching the rank of Lieut-Colonel with the First the Queen's Dragoon Guards. He entered Parliament in 1974 as MP for Petersfield. HAMPSHIRE NORTH EASTThis Conservative stronghold comprises fast-growing suburbs and villages near the M3 motorway. The Tories held it last time with a majority of more than 12,500 over the Liberal Democrats so it is unlikely to change hands this time. The sitting Tory MP is Old Etonian James Arbuthnot, a direct descendant of James V of Scotland. Mr Arbuthnot is a barrister and a former Defence Minister.HAMPSHIRE NORTH WESTThis rural constituency, centred on the town of Andover, is seemingly impregnable Conservative territory. The party will be defending a majority of 13,264 at this election. The sitting MP Old Etonian Sir George Young was Transport Secretary in the last two years of John Major's administration. He has twice, unsuccessfully, been a candidate for the Speakership of the Commons. Before representing this constituency, Sir George, for more than 20 years, was MP for Ealing Acton.HAMPSTEAD AND KILBURNThis is a new constituency in North London which is the subject of contradictory predictions about the outcome at this election. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed in 2005, Labour would have scraped home with a majority of just 474 votes over the Liberal Democrats. But a PoliticsHome poll predicts that this seat will fall into Tory hands. Whatever the outcome, it will be a hard-fought marginal campaign. The Oscar-winning outspoken left-wing actress Glenda Jackson is current Labour MP for the disappearing Hampstead seat. The new constituency includes upmarket Hampstead Town and Belsize and working class Kilburn, traditionally home for the Irish community.  HARBOROUGHThis constituency, which has a large rural area, is centred on the busy town of Market Harborough, which was given its cattle market by Henry II in the 12th century. It is also a centre for the textile, wool, hosiery and footwear industries, as well as having an engineering and financial services base. It has been held for many years by the Tories, defending a majority of about 4,000 over the Liberal Democrats who, over recent elections, have been creeping up behind the Conservatives. Edward Garnier, who has been MP for this constituency since 1992, is a defamation and media law specialist. He is also a Crown Court Recorder.HARLOWThis is one of the tightest marginals in the country. It was held by Labour at the last election by a majority of a mere 97 over the Tories who claim they would have won the seat had it not been for the intervention of the United Kingdom Independence Party. A battle royal can therefore be expected this time. This was the last constituency to declare its result in 2005 – the second recount was suspended at 6am because the staff were too tired to continue. The commuter-belt seat covers the new town of Harlow plus several parts from the Epping Forest district. The sitting MP Bill Rammell, who was appointed a Defence Minister in June, 2009, captured the seat from the Tories in 1997 and has held it ever since. He is a former business manager.HARROGATE AND KNARESBOROUGHThis was once regarded as safe Tory territory, but over recent elections – like other spa towns such as Bath and Cheltenham - has switched to the Liberal Democrats. Phil Willis, the sitting MP, captured the seat from the Tories in 1997 with the surprising defeat of the former Tory Chancellor Norman Lamont. Mr Willis, a former teacher, now enjoys a majority of just under 10,500. Harrogate's prosperity is based on its spa heritage, but it is also now a lucrative centre for conferences and exhibitions, while Knaresborough is a prosperous market town.HARROW EASTThis North West London seat, with many Asian voters, has traditionally been a better area for Labour than neighbouring Harrow West. Even so, it has still been mostly Conservative since the Second World War, but Labour did win here in landslide victories in 1945 and 1966. They won here again in 1997, and have held on in the two general elections since, a feat they didn't achieve in previous landslides. Tony McNulty, the sitting MP, had a majority of under 5,000 over the Tories in 2005, so a tough battle is expected. Mr McNulty, a former lecturer, resigned as a Work and Pensions Minister in 2009 following the expenses row.HARROW WESTThis constituency, which includes the famous Harrow School, was always regarded as a safe Conservative seat in North West London until Labour captured it in their 1997 landslide. New boundary changes have made it a safer Labour seat than in 2005. MP Gareth Thomas, a former teacher, has been a prominent renewable energy campaigner before becoming a Minister of State in the Department for International Development.HARTLEPOOLThis is a traditionally Labour seaside constituency in the North East of England. The current MP, Iain Wright, a former chartered accountant, secured a majority of almost 7,500 over the Liberal Democrats at the last election, with the Tories a long way behind in third place. Labour should have little difficulty in retaining this seat this time. It was formerly in the hands of Peter Mandelson, who quit as an MP in 2004 when he was appointed a European Commissioner, thus creating the last by-election before the 2005 general election.HARWICH AND ESSEX NORTHThis is a new parliamentary seat which experts have calculated would have produced a Conservative majority of just over 5,500 if it had existed at the time of the 2006 general election. The constituency, centred on Harwich, will also include Wivenhoe and Brightlingsea. The Tory candidate will be Bernard Jenkin, the present MP for North Essex which will be assimilated into the new constituency. The current Harwich MP, Douglas Carswell, is to become the Conservative candidate for Clacton.HASTINGS AND RYEIn addition to Hastings, now a declining seaside town, and Rye, this marginal Labour-held constituency on the south coast, also includes the Cinque Port of Winchelsea, officially the smallest town in Britain. It was regarded as safe Conservative territory until Labour captured it from them in 1997 and have held it ever since. It has been a three-way marginal, but in recent years, the Liberal Democrat vote has fallen away. The sitting MP Michael Foster had a majority of just over 2,000 over the Conservatives in 2005.HAVANTThis seat, which also includes the towns of Havant and Emsworth, is now seen as safe Conservative. It is a mainly urban south coast seat, regarded as the home of the Royal Navy. The Tories at present enjoy a majority of around 6,500 over Labour which should be enough for them to retain the seat this time. The sitting MP is "Two brains" David Willetts, who has been described as a one-man think tank. He worked as a civil servant before entering Parliament.HAYES AND HARLINGTONThe mainly working-class constituency in Outer London contains Heathrow Airport, which provides the seat's main avenue of employment. The seat has been in Conservative hands, even in recent years, but has swung heavily back to Labour. Labour now hold it with a majority approaching 11,000. The sitting MP John McDonnell is a hard-line left-winger who has from time to time criticised the leadership of his party. In 2006, he planned to stand against Gordon Brown for the party leadership, but failed to get sufficient nominations to proceed.HAZEL GROVEThis is a middle-class Manchester commuter town at the top end of the Peak District. This had been a Conservative-held seat from 1974 until 1997 when the Liberal Democrats regained it. The sitting MP Andrew Stunell has built up his support since then and goes into this election with a seemingly comfortable majority of approaching 8,000 in 2005. Mr Stunell trained as an architect – and started a fashion trend at Liberal Democrat conferences, by wearing a suit and tie rather than an anorak.HEMEL HEMPSTEADThis Hertfordshire seat in commuter distance from London has all the makings of being a cliff-hanging marginal. It is now eighth on the list of Labour target seats. At the last election the Conservatives sneaked home with a majority of only 499, and the pundits claim that the result this time could be even tighter than that. Hemel Hempstead itself is a successful new town with a welter of IT companies. The sitting MP Mike Penning is a former Grenadier Guardsman and fireman. He is the only MP to have served in the British army not as an officer. The constituency includes the Buncefield oil depot site which exploded in an inferno in 2005.HEMSWORTHThis constituency includes ex-mining towns of South Yorkshire. It was once said that in this constituency Labour votes were weighed rather than counted. At one time when the constituency was much bigger, the Labour majority was more than 30,000 – the largest in the country. The party secured a majority here in 2005 of some 13,500 and there is virtually no prospect that the sitting MP Jon Trickett, a former builder and plumber, will be seriously challenged this time. HENDONThis suburban seat in outer North London had always been regarded as a Conservative stronghold, but it was wrested from them by Labour in 1997 and has been held by the party ever since. However, Labour had a majority of only 2,700 over the Tories in 2005 and the Conservatives have targeted this seat as one they must win if they are to form a government with a workable majority. The sitting MP Andrew Dismore is a personal injury lawyer. He recently spoke in the Commons for 197 minutes, which still stands as a 21st century record.HENLEYThe South Oxfordshire seat of Henley has been in Conservative hands for generations. For some 25 years, it was represented at Westminster by Michael Heseltine, later Lord Heseltine, and after that by Boris Johnson who resigned in 2008 after being elected Mayor of London. At the subsequent by-election, the Tories romped home with a majority of over 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Labour were pushed into fifth place, below the British National Party. The sitting MP John Howell has a doctorate in archaeology and later worked as a tax inspector and after that as a tax adviser. The mainly rural and commuter constituency includes Henley, home of the regatta, and Thame where leading campaigner for Parliament John Hampden died from wounds received at the Battle of Chalgrove Field in 1643. HEREFORD AND HEREFORDSHIRE SOUTH This is a new rural constituency bordering Wales. It is based on the disappearing seat of Hereford, which is now in the hands of the Liberal Democrats. Experts say that if this seat had existed in 2005, the Liberal Democrats would have scraped home with a majority of around 1,000 only over the Conservatives, so it is very much up for grabs this time. The sitting Liberal Democrat MP for Hereford, Paul Keetch has announced he will be standing down at this election. The party's new candidate is Sarah Carr, who has worked in the media and communications industry. She comes from a farming family and the first word she ever uttered was "tractor".HEREFORDSHIRE NORTHThis is another new constituency, the successor seat to the disappearing Leominster seat. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed in 2005, the Tories would have romped home with a majority of over 12,500, with the Liberal Democrats runners up. The Tory candidate will be Old Etonian Bill Wiggin, an agricultural expert and at present MP for Leominster where he registered a majority of over 13,000 in 2005. Mr Wiggin served in the Royal Welch Fusiliers in the TA.HERTFORD AND STORTFORDThis is a semi-rural constituency with picturesque villages separated by farmland. There is a lot of Green Belt land here and it is a popular area, particularly Bishops Stortford, for commuters to London but the seat also enjoys an active industrial base. It is regarded as a rock-solid safe Conservative seat. The party won it with a majority of more than 13,000 over Labour at the last election. The sitting Tory MP Mark Prisk is a surveyor.HERTFORDSHIRE NORTH EASTThis constituency includes the commuter towns of Baldock, Royston and Letchworth Garden City, the first of its type in the country. The seat includes light engineering companies and some high technology research companies. It is a safe Conservative constituency which recorded a majority of more than 9,000 for the Tories at the last general election over Labour with the Liberal Democrats hot on their heels in third place. The sitting MP is Oliver Heald, a successful barrister.HERTFORDSHIRE SOUTH WESTThis oddly-shaped seat forms a thin strip to the south west of Hertfordshire from near Watford in the south to Tring in the north. It is a prosperous area and is a safe Tory seat. It includes the towns of Berkhamsted and Rickmansworth and Moor Park golf course. At the last election, the Conservative candidate, David Gauke recorded a majority of almost 8,500 over the Liberal Democrats.HERTSMEREThis safe Tory Hertfordshire seat has Borehamwood in its centre as the main town. It is a prosperous commuting area. At the last general election, the Conservatives romped home with a majority of more than 11,000, almost the same number of votes secured by the Labour runner-up. The Yorkshire-born lawyer James Clappison has held the seat for the Conservatives since 1992. Before that the constituency had been represented by ex-Tory Cabinet Minister Cecil (now Lord) Parkinson from 1983 when the seat was created.HEXHAMThis was the only seat in north-east England to return a Conservative MP at the last election. Indeed, it has been represented by the Tories consistently since 1924. This is a mostly rural seat which houses much of Newcastle's commuting middle-class. Geographically, it is the second-largest constituency in England. It stretches from south of the River Tyne to the Scottish border and includes part of Hadrian's Wall. The Tories retained it at the last election with a majority of just over 5,000. The sitting MP, former journalist Peter Atkinson, is retiring at this election. HEYWOOD AND MIDDLETONThis Greater Manchester seat on the fringes of Rochdale and to the north west of Manchester itself, is a Labour stronghold. It was created in 1983, and at the last election, Labour romped home with a majority of more than 11,000 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP is Jim Dobbin, a former microbiologist and an ex-leader of Rochdale Council. It is unlikely Labour will face any serious challenge from their opponents.HIGH PEAKThis constituency, which covers much of North Derbyshire, including the spa town of Buxton, is a Labour-Conservative marginal. Labour regard it as their 13th most marginal seat. Before the 1997 general election, Labour had gained this seat only once, in 1966. They have now held it for three consecutive general elections. But their majority has been dwindling. At the last election, they beat the Conservatives by only 735 votes, so a tough fight can be expected this time. The sitting MP Tom Levitt, a former teacher, who has become the longest-serving Labour MP in this constituency – he was first elected in 1997 – is retiring at this election. The constituency includes Eyam where in 1665 villagers decided not to flee from the plague thus sparing neighbouring areas from infection. HITCHIN AND HARPENDENThis constituency was created in 1997 from parts of several former Hertfordshire seats. In addition to Hitchin and Harpenden, it includes Wheathampstead as well. It is seen as a prosperous commuter belt area, with a fast rail link to London King's Cross. The Tories secured a majority of more than 11,000 over the Liberal Democrats at the last election, with Labour jostling with the Lib Dems for second place. The constituency, in its present form, has had only one MP, former Tory cabinet minister Peter Lilley, who sat for St Albans before fighting this seat.HOLBORN AND ST PANCRASThis Inner London constituency is a Labour safe haven. And with some 85,200 voters, this constituency has one of the highest electorates in the capital. It includes trendy areas of Camden, plus the fringes of the West End. Labour held on to the seat last time with a majority of approaching 5,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP is former Health Secretary Frank Dobson, who had previously represented its predecessor seat of Holborn and St Pancras South. Mr Dobson is now London's longest-serving Labour MP. He unsuccessfully stood for election as Mayor of London in 2000, losing to Ken Livingstone who was then running as an independent.HORNCHURCH AND UPMINSTERThis new seat on the outer edges of East London is formed from parts of the disappearing constituencies of Hornchurch and Upminster. Experts have calculated that had it existed for the 2005 general election, the Conservatives would have been easy victors with a majority of more than 8,000. The Tory candidate will be Angela Watkinson who at present represents Upminster. She is on the right-wing of the party and a supporter of pro-life issues. Spitfires from Hornchurch airbase played a leading role in the Battle of Britain. HORNSEY AND WOOD GREENSince its creation in 1983, this North London seat has been represented, successively, by MPs from all three main parties. It is at present in the hands of the Liberal Democrats who captured the seat from Labour with a majority approaching 2,500 in 2005, with the Tories falling way behind in third place. The sitting MP, Lynne Featherstone, who has been active over the Baby P tragedy, captured the seat in 2005 at the third attempt. The constituency includes Alexandra Palace where the first public television broadcast took place in 1936. HORSHAMThis is an ultra-safe Tory stronghold in the northern part of West Sussex. It is a prosperous area comprising some smart southern towns around Gatwick. At the last election, the Tories romped home with a majority of more than 12,500 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP is Francis Maude, a regular front-bencher and a former chairman of the Conservative Party. He is often depicted as a doleful Eeyore-type figure.HOUGHTON AND SUNDERLAND SOUTHThis is a new constituency provisionally ranked as the 25th safest Labour seat in the United Kingdom, and the ninth safest Labour seat in England. Experts have calculated that had it existed for the 2005 general election, Labour would have triumphed with a majority of just short of 17,000. The sitting Labour MP for the disappearing Houghton and Washington East constituency, Fraser Kemp, is retiring at this election. HOVEThis seaside constituency used to be a Conservative stronghold but it was won by Labour in 1997 and has been in their hands ever since. It is now a crucial marginal which the Tories must win if they are to achieve a working majority in the next Parliament. The Labour majority tumbled from over 3,000 in 2001 to a mere 420 in 2005. The sitting Labour MP South Wales born Celia Barlow is a former television producer and reporter, first in Hong Kong before joining the BBC and, for a time, working at Westminster. .HUDDERSFIELDThis Pennine town east of Leeds with its mixed economy is a safe Labour constituency. The party retained it at the last general election with a majority exceeding 8,300 over the Liberal Democrats. Barry Sheerman, a former university lecturer, who has represented the area at Westminster since 1979, is chairman of the influential Commons Select Committee on Education and Skills. He has been an outspoken MP, not afraid to challenge his own Government. He called last June for a secret ballot within the Parliamentary Labour Party to decide whether Gordon Brown should stay on as Prime Minister.HULL EASTThis rock-solid Labour seat has been represented by John Prescott, the former Deputy Prime Minister since 1970. Mr Prescott, a firm believer in old rather than new Labour will not be contesting this election. But his successor, lawyer Karl Turner, will be defending a majority approaching 12,000. This constituency comprises a dense residential area and a high proportion of council tenants and Labour can expect no serious challenge from political opponents. John Prescott's son David failed in his bid to succeed his father in this seat.HULL NORTHThis diverse but largely working-class constituency contains some large social housing estates, plus some of the most desirable residential areas in Hull. The seat, a Labour stronghold, has Hull University at its centre and thus also has a large student population. At the last election, Labour recorded a majority of approaching 7,500 over the Liberal Democrats, with the Conservatives miles behind them. Barrister Diana Johnson, the sitting Labour MP, won the seat at the last election, after it had been held for many years by Kevin McNamara who defended it in a famous by-election ahead of the 1966 general election. A pledge to build the Humber Bridge was alleged by some to have swung the contest. HULL WEST AND HESSLEThis seat comprises the city centre and the fishing port. It is an impregnable Labour seat. The party will be defending a majority of nearly 9,500 secured at the last general election. The sitting MP is Alan Johnson, the former postman who became Home Secretary, and whose name has been mentioned as a possible successor to Gordon Brown. The seat crosses the boundary with the East Riding of Yorkshire to include Hessle. HUNTINGDONThis rock-solid Tory seat, largely of flat farmland, has a history of distinguished politicians. In the 16th century it was Oliver Cromwell's political base, while Sir Robert Peel – son of the Prime Minister of the same name - was its MP in the 1880s. More recently, it was the seat held by Sir John Major from 1983 until his retirement in 2001. At the last general election Sir John's successor solicitor Jonathan Djanogly recorded a majority of nearly 13,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Among his opponents this time will be someone rejoicing in the name of Lord Toby Jug, fighting on behalf of the Monster Raving Loony Party.HYNDBURNThis is a Labour-inclined seat in East Lancashire, based on the town of Accrington, which was the smallest town in Britain to raise a full battalion during the First World War. The town also contains one of the most modern brickworks in the country. Labour secured a majority of 5,500 at the last election, a majority which could be endangered if the Tories put up an aggressive fight. The sitting Labour MP, Greg Pope, who won the seat from the Tories in 1992 and has held it ever since, is retiring at this election for family reasons. ILFORD NORTHThis is a crucial marginal seat, which has changed hands several times, in the north-east tip of Greater London on the London-Essex border. At present it is in Tory hands, but with a majority of only just over 1,500 over Labour in 2005. It was a Tory gain from Labour at the last election, and the Conservatives can expect a full-on challenge from Labour this time. The sitting MP East End born Lee Scott was a professional fundraiser for a number of charities before entering Parliament in 2005. The constituency is the traditional home of many London taxi drivers. It includes both middle class housing areas and the giant Hainault council estate on the border with Essex.ILFORD SOUTHIlford South, now a safe Labour seat, comprises a thriving commercial shopping centre in north-east London, and a large Asian population. Labour retained the seat at the last election with a majority of more than 9,000 over the Conservatives. The sitting Labour MP Mike Gapes has been chairman of the influential Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee since 2005.INVERCLYDEThis constituency was created for the 2005 general election and is a Labour stronghold. It is an industrial and hilly area concentrating largely on electronics and containing the town of Greenock. At the last election, Labour romped home with a majority of well over 11,000 over the Scottish Nationalists. The sitting MP is David Cairns, a priest and ex-director of the Christian Socialist Movement. His ambitions to enter the Commons were at first thwarted because of legislation which barred Catholic priests from being elected to Parliament. Those laws were subsequently repealed. INVERNESS, NAIRN, BADENOCH & STRATHSPEYThis seat is held by the Liberal Democrats, but with Labour offering a serious challenge, and with the Scottish Nationalists and the Conservatives – on the evidence of the 2005 general election anyway – barely within striking distance. This large constituency includes some of Scotland's finest tourist countryside. The sitting MP Danny Alexander recorded a 4,148 majority over Labour in 2005. He is chief of staff to Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader. In 1746 redcoats led by “stinking Billie”, the Duke of Cumberland, defeated Jacobite rebels under Bonnie Prince Charlie at Culloden, just outside Inverness, in the last pitched battle on British soil. The far flung constituency also contains Loch Ness, home of the elusive monster.  IPSWICHThis is a Labour-inclined seat which, however, has changed hands more than once over recent year. However, since their 1997 landslide, Labour's grip on the seat has tightened with more substantial majorities than hitherto. Labour will be defending a majority this time of something over 5,000 which, in the present political climate, should not be regarded as impregnable. The sitting MP Chris Mole entered Parliament at a by-election in 2001. He is former leader of Suffolk County Council from 1993 until his arrival at Westminster. In 2001, the council was named Council of the Year. The city is a major railway junction and includes a port on the river Orwell. Many residents commute to London.  ISLE OF WIGHTThis constituency, which has changed hands from time to time between the Liberals and the Conservatives, has, at around 108,000 the highest electorate of any seat in the United Kingdom. Attempts to split the island into two constituencies have met with so much opposition that the idea was dropped. At present, the seat is held by the Conservatives with a majority of almost 13,000 over the Liberal Democrats, a huge increase over the Tory majority at the 2001 general election. The sitting Tory MP Andrew Turner is a former teacher. The island, a popular holiday destination, is home to Cowes Regatta and also one of the few remaining colonies of red squirrels.ISLINGTON NORTHThis is a rock-solid Labour seat in North London – and, in acreage, the smallest constituency in the United Kingdom. This constituency represents the less prosperous part of Islington, unlike the trendiness of south Islington. There is a large Cypriot community here. The sitting MP, left-winger Jeremy Corbyn, registered a 6,700 majority over the Liberal Democrats at the last election, a majority that was almost halved compared with that at the 2001 general election. Corbyn, who entered Parliament in 1983, won the 2001 Beard of the Year award, after describing his beard as "a form of dissent" against New Labour. He regularly defies Labour whips. ISLINGTON SOUTH AND FINSBURYThis North London seat is one of the ten most marginal constituencies in the country. It has been described as "part grand, part poor". At present it is held by Labour with a majority of just 484 over the Liberal Democrats, and with the Conservatives miles behind. Labour will desperately want to hold on, but they will have a huge fight on their hands to retain the seat. The sitting MP Emily Thornberry is a human rights lawyer. ISLWYNThis south Wales constituency, historically known for coal-mining, is an utterly safe Labour seat with no other party ever able to get anywhere near a serious challenge to them. It was formerly held by the ex-Labour leader Neil Kinnock, before he went to Europe. At the last election, Labour registered a majority of 15,740 over Plaid Cymru who, in second place, were just a whisker ahead of the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Labour MP Don Touhig, a former journalist, is one of Gordon Brown's closest political allies. Since the closure of the last pit in this constituency in 1989, Islwyn has been successful in gaining Government support in attracting new industries. JARROWThis out-and-out Labour constituency consists of a section of the metropolitan district of South Tyneside. It includes the ancient monastery at Jarrow, and runs from the River Tyne at Jarrow to the North Sea coast at Souter Point. The former shipbuilding town is famous for its march against unemployment in the 1930s. This is another of those seats where you could virtually weigh, rather than count, the Labour vote. At the last election, Labour sailed home with a majority of almost 14,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP Jarrow-born Stephen Hepburn is a former political researcher.KEIGHLEYThis is a Labour/Tory marginal seat currently in the hands of Labour. Keighley itself is a mainly Labour-voting area, while the spa town of Ilkley is more Conservative inclined. The surrounding rural areas are also predominantly Tory. There is a large ethnic community in this constituency – as well as the Brontes’ famous parsonage. At the last election, Labour's Ann Cryer recorded a majority of nearly 5,000 over the Conservatives. Mrs Cryer, the widow of Bob Cryer who formerly held this seat, is retiring at this election. Nick Griffin, the BNP leader, fought this seat in 2005 and secured more than 4,000 votes. KENILWORTH AND SOUTHAMThis is a new Warwickshire seat which abolishes the existing link between Kenilworth and Rugby. It straddles the M40 corridor. It includes Warwick University and the National Agricultural Centre. Experts have calculated that had this seat been in existence at the 2005 general election, the Conservatives would have romped home with a majority approaching 11,000 over Labour. The Tory candidate is Jeremy Wright, the current MP for Rugby and Kenilworth, is a lawyer who specialises in criminal law.KENSINGTONThis is a "recreated" London seat which existed from 1974 to 1997 and then disappeared. It should be regarded as Conservative-inclined. Experts have calculated that if the constituency had existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Tories would have won it with a majority of 4,500 over Labour. The Tory candidate is Sir Malcolm Rifkind, a former Foreign Secretary, and the present MP for Kensington and Chelsea. Kensington became popular in the 17th century when King William III, who suffered from asthma, led the exodus there from the growing City of London smog. The varied constituency ranges from super rich South Kensington to the Notting Hill poverty pockets. It also includes Portobello Road street market.  KETTERINGThis semi-rural predominantly middle-class Northamptonshire constituency is a classic marginal, at present in the hands of the Conservatives, with Labour hot on their heels. The Tories will be defending a vulnerable majority of 3,300, trimmed further by boundary changes. The economic situation in the constituency has affected its industrial activity. However, there is a thriving Weetabix factory at Burton Latimer. The sitting Tory MP Philip Hollobone wrested the seat from Labour at the last election. Amid the expenses scandal, Mr Hollobone emerged as the thriftiest and cheapest MP of them all.KILMARNOCK AND LOUDOUNThis industrial, self-contained area south-west of Glasgow is a relatively safe Labour seat. In fact, it has been constantly in Labour hands since 1945. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority of 8,700 over the Scottish Nationalists who represent the only real challenge to Labour. The SNP won Kilmarnock’s Scottish Parliament seat at the 2007 election. The sitting Labour MP Des Browne, former Defence Secretary, is standing down at this election. KINGSTON AND SURBITONThis constituency, created in 1997, is in the south-west extremities of Greater London and is largely a middle-class suburban area. It seemed to enjoy all the trappings of a Conservative constituency, but when the boundaries were redrawn in 1997, Norman Lamont, a former Tory Chancellor, who had represented Kingston for some years, was not selected to fight the seat. In that year, the seat was won by the Liberal Democrats and has been in their hands ever since. The sitting MP Edward Davey held the seat at the last election with a majority of almost 9,000 over the Conservatives, so it now seems to be safe Liberal Democrat territory. Mr Davey has been described as more left-wing than Labour.KINGSWOODThis mixed urban and rural seat, now in Labour hands, covers the eastern suburbs of Bristol outside the city boundary. Kingswood used to be an important coal mining and shoe-manufacturing district. However older factories in this area have been replaced by the likes of Rolls Royce, British Aerospace, DRG Cartons, Bendix Engineering and Avon Tin Printers. At the last election Labour, which polled 26,491 votes, received more votes in this constituency than in almost any other. The sitting MP ex-lecturer and left-winger Roger Berry secured a majority of approaching 8,000 over the Conservatives at the last general election.KIRKCALDY AND COWDENBEATHThis ultra-safe Labour seat in Fife has been represented by the Prime Minister Gordon Brown since its creation in 2005. Before that, Mr Brown sat for the now disappeared seat of Dunfermline East. At the last general election Mr Brown secured a majority for Labour of more than 18,000 over the Scottish Nationalists. The seat comprises a length of the Forth coastline, plus industrial centres.KNOWSLEYThis is a new seat on Merseyside containing much of the disappearing seat of Knowsley South. Experts have calculated that had the seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have won it with a massive majority of over 24,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The Labour candidate for this seat will be George Howarth, at present the MP for Knowsley North and Sefton East. He has represented the area at Westminster since 1986. Knowsley covers Green Belt area, industrial and business parks as well as having urban residential developments.LAGAN VALLEYThis Northern Ireland constituency is overwhelmingly unionist and has traditionally had one of the highest votes for the Ulster Unionist Party in all of Northern Ireland. This was due in part to the personal popularity of James Molyneaux, the former Unionist Party leader, who represented the seat for many years. The MP since 1997 has been Jeffrey Donaldson who was elected as a member of the Ulster Unionist Party but switched to the Democratic Unionist Party in 2004. At the last election, Mr Donaldson secured a majority of some 14,000 over the Ulster Unionist Party. The name of the constituency was recently changed from Lagan, a dirty polluted river, to Lagan Valley, an attractive area of countryside. Even so it is mainly an urban constituency.LANARK AND HAMILTON EASTThis super-safe Labour seat was created for the 2005 general election. It is an ex-mining area on the M74 south of Glasgow with Lanark as its largest town. At the 2005 general election, Labour took the seat with a majority of almost 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP, Jimmy Hood, formerly represented Clydesdale. He was a mining engineer and a prominent figure in the National Union of Mineworkers.LANCASHIRE WESTThis constituency includes the historic market town of Ormskirk and the new town of Skelmersdale. It is Labour-held at the moment but with a majority of just over 6,000 over the Conservatives at the last election it cannot be considered a Labour stronghold. In fact it is a seat which the Tories, who have in the past been the holders, are targeting. The sitting MP, Rosie Cooper, who entered Parliament in 2005, has worked in public relations and as a "project coordinator".LANCASTER AND FLEETWOODThis is a new north-west of England seat created from the city of Lancaster and the borough of Wyre. Experts have calculated that had it been in existence at the time of the 2005 general election it would have resulted in a Labour majority of some 3,400 over the Conservatives. That calculation transforms the constituency into a crucial marginal which the Conservatives will need to win if they are to form the next Government with a working majority at Westminster.LEEDS CENTRALThis is a safe Labour seat represented at present by Environment Secretary Hilary Benn, son of Tony Benn. At the last election, Mr Benn secured a majority of nearly 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats. At that election, the British National Party registered 1,200 votes in this constituency. In the 1999 by-election in this seat, the constituency experienced the lowest voter turn-out in British post-war history – 19.9%. It comprises inner-city Leeds, its commercial centre and universities.LEEDS EASTThis is another rock-solid Labour seat which, until 1992, was represented for many years by Denis Healey, the former Labour Chancellor. At the last general election, Labour swept home with a majority exceeding 11,500 over the Liberal Democrats, with the Conservatives hot on the Lib Dems’ heels in third place. The sitting Labour MP, George Mudie, who took over from Denis Healey, is a former trade union official. The seat comprises large housing estates on the eastern edge of the city.LEEDS NORTH EASTThis is as diverse seat containing both inner-city elements, suburban housing and farmland. It is a Labour-held seat but their majority is really far from impregnable. At the last general election, Labour retained the constituency with a majority of about 5,200 over the Conservatives, so a determined thrust by the Tories could bring them success here. The sitting MP Fabian Hamilton, a former taxi-driver and systems consultant, is quitting because of the decision to adopt an all-woman short list. He said: "I really mean it when I say that being kept out of a job just because I'm a man offends me as deeply as being kept out of a job just because I'm a Jew." LEEDS NORTH WESTThis seat is currently a marginal between the Liberal Democrats and Labour, although the Conservatives, in third place, are still in a position to snatch the prize this time. At the last general election, the Liberal Democrats captured the seat from Labour, but enjoyed a majority of only 1,877. This constituency comprises the outer suburbs of Leeds and includes professional middle-class residential areas as well as a considerable student population. The sitting MP Greg Mulholland was involved in marketing before entering Parliament in 2005.LEEDS WEST This is a safe Labour seat which they held at the last election with a majority of approaching 13,000 over the Liberal Democrats. It stands on the River Aire and its economy is shifting from manufacturing to service industries. The sitting MP John Battle, who has represented the constituency for 20 years, is retiring at this general election. The new Labour candidate is Rachel Reeves, an economist who has worked at the Bank of England and the British Embassy in Washington. This is the only constituency in the Leeds area which has existed continuously under an unchanged name since 1885.LEICESTER EASTThis is now a rock-solid Labour seat although it has, in the past, been in Conservative hands. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority of nearly 16,000 over the Conservatives, so its days as a marginal appear long gone. This inner-city constituency has a strong Asian population. Keith Vaz, a former solicitor, who has represented the constituency since 1987, was the first Asian MP at Westminster since Communist Shapurji Saklatvala lost his Battersea North seat in 1929..LEICESTER SOUTHThe seat is centred on the southern part of Leicester covering leafy suburbs as well as inner city areas with a strong Asian community and deprived outer estates. There are also a large number of students at the University of Leicester and De Montfort University, which are both in the constituency. The seat is held by Labour but not with a very substantial majority. Labour won it back in 2005 from the Liberal Democrats who were victors at a 2004 by-election. The Labour majority is only 3,700 so it is vulnerable. The sitting MP Sir Peter Soulsby, who was leader of Leicester Council for 17 years, was knighted by the Queen in 1999 for services to the city.LEICESTER WESTLeicester West, a Labour stronghold, had the highest level of unemployment in Britain, with 13.8% of residents registered out of work in 2009. Labour will be defending a majority of more than 9,000 over the Conservatives at this election. The sitting MP, Patricia Hewitt, the former Secretary of State for Health, is standing down at this election for family reasons. LEICESTERSHIRE NORTH WESTThis is a key marginal seat with the main population centres being Coalville and Ashby-de-la-Zouch. The constituency also includes East Midlands Airport. It is divided between Labour-voting former mining areas, and Tory-inclined rural villages. Labour gained this seat from the Tories in 1997 and have held it ever since. Labour's majority at the last election was under 4,500 so it is clearly up for grabs. The sitting MP, David Taylor, a former accountant and computer applications manager, died on Boxing Day last year.LEICESTERSHIRE SOUTHThis is a new constituency with boundaries similar to the existing Blaby constituency. Experts have calculated that had it existed for the 2005 general election, the Tories would have won comfortably over Labour with a majority of more than 7,500. This constituency stands on the south bank of the River Soar outside Leicester. The Conservative candidate is Andrew Robathan, a former Coldstream Guards officer who sits for Blaby, formerly occupied by the ex-Tory Chancellor Nigel Lawson.LEIGHThis is a rock-solid Labour seat with no other party within miles of getting elected. It is working class ex-mining territory in the Wigan area, but now more devoted to light industry. At the last election, Labour returned their candidate with a majority of more than 17,000 over the Conservatives – so no surprises can be expected this time. The present incumbent is Andy Burnham, Health Secretary, who was first elected to this seat in 2001. He is a fervent Everton supporter and claims to have joined the Labour Party at the age of 14.LEWESThis constituency which was created in 1295 returned Conservative MPs exclusively between 1874 until 1997, when the Liberal Democrats ousted them and now appear to have a firm foothold in this seat. Lewes is described as "an old-fashioned small town east of Brighton". The constituency also includes Glyndebourne within its boundaries. The Liberals retained the seat in 2005 with a majority of almost 8,500 over the Conservatives. The Greens, who came fourth in 2005, have nevertheless targeted this seat as a possible success for them. The sitting MP Norman Baker is known for uncovering scandal and conflicts of interest among MPs and the Government. In his first three months in the Commons, he asked more questions than Tim Rathbone, his Tory predecessor, had asked in 23 years.LEWISHAM DEPTFORDThis is a virtually impregnable Labour stronghold in south London, running alongside the River Thames. There is a trendy arts and music scene in parts of the constituency, but there are also areas of desolate council housing and deprivation. Labour retained the seat at the last election with a majority of nearly 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives only narrowly behind in third place. The sitting MP Joan Ruddock, who first won the seat in 1992, is a former chairman of CND.LEWISHAM EASTThis seat, once represented by Herbert Morrison, a Labour Cabinet minister in the 1940s, is at the moment in Labour's hands but their majority of 6,750 must be considered vulnerable in the present political climate. The inner-city constituency includes such middle-class areas as Blackheath as well as big estates. The sitting MP Bridget Prentice, who won it from the Conservatives in 1992, is not contesting this election. LEWISHAM WEST AND PENGEThis is a new constituency compiled from parts of Lewisham West and Beckenham. It includes Crystal Palace National Sports Centre which is on the site of the building which originally housed the 1851 Great Exhibition, which was burnt down in 1936. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have won it with a majority of some 7,800 over the Liberal Democrats. The Labour candidate will be Jim Dowd, who secured a majority of nearly 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats in the disappearing seat of Lewisham West at the last general election.LEYTON AND WANSTEADThis is a relatively safe Labour seat in North East London, with a large ethnic minority population, but Labour's majority of below 7,000 over the Liberal Democrats at the last election cannot be considered impregnable. The sitting MP Harry Cohen has represented the area since 1983. Left-winger Mr Cohen has written more than 200 sonnets – some of them quite risque – and is a founder member of the Parliamentary Group for Dance. He is not standing at this election. In the famous 1965 by-election for the predecessor seat of Leyton, the, then, Foreign Secretary Patrick Gordon Walker was defeated by Tories in a shock result.LICHFIELDThis can be regarded as a relatively safe Conservative seat. There are minor boundary changes for this election, but these are said to favour the Tories more than any other party. At the last general election, the Tories secured a majority of just over 7,000 over Labour. This seat includes the pleasant cathedral city of Lichfield on the borders of the West Midlands and the Potteries. The sitting MP the flamboyant Michael Fabricant, a former broadcaster, entered Parliament as MP for the old seat of mid-Staffordshire in 1992 and subsequently became MP for Lichfield. He is easily recognised in the Commons by his bright blond hair which some journalists – and politicians too – have insisted is a wig.LINCOLNThis cathedral-city constituency must now be regarded as a marginal. At the 2005 general election, Labour retained this constituency with a majority over the Conservatives of under 5,000 – which makes it exceedingly vulnerable to a Tory attack. The sitting MP Gillian Merron entered Parliament in 1997 as a Blair babe on an all-woman shortlist. With the splitting of the City of York constituency at this general election, Lincoln will be the oldest constituency in continuous existence in the United Kingdom, having been established in 1265. It has been a bellwether constituency since October 1974, having voted for the winning party in each election since that time. This is despite it previously being a relatively safe seat for the Labour Party.LINLITHGOW AND FALKIRK EASTThis constituency was created for the 2005 general election, replacing the disappearing seats of Falkirk East and Linlithgow. It must be considered a safe Labour seat, with a majority of some 11,000 over the Scottish Nationalists at the last election. This is a constituency of small towns, including Bathgate and the ancient town of Linlithgow, and what have been described as "bleak ex-shale mines". The sitting Labour MP Michael Connarty is a former factory worker and teacher.LIVERPOOL RIVERSIDEThis is a safe Labour Liverpool city-centre seat with high unemployment and considerable deprivation. At the last general election, in a very low turn-out, Labour romped home with a majority of more than 10,200 over the Liberal Democrats, with the Conservatives in third place a long way behind the Lib Dems. However, that election showed a considerable surge to the Lib Dems but nowhere near enough to unseat Labour. The sitting Labour MP Louise Ellman is a former leader of Lancashire County Council and is the outspoken chairman of the influential Commons Select Committee on Transport. This constituency, both in 2001 and 2005, had the lowest turn-out of any UK seat.LIVERPOOL WALTONThis Merseyside constituency covers the north of the city of Liverpool and includes within its boundaries the grounds of both Liverpool and Everton football clubs – the only seat in the land which can boast two Premiership clubs. Although it used to be a Conservative-held seat, it is now one of Labour's safest constituencies, the party having polled over 70% of the votes cast at every election since 1992. Labour go into this election defending a majority of almost 16,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP, fervent Everton supporter Peter Kilfoyle, once played a big part in rooting Militants out of Labour. He entered Parliament in a by-election in 1991.LIVERPOOL WAVERTREEThis Merseyside constituency which covers the eastern part of the city of Liverpool is now a safe Labour haven, although the predecessor seat with the same name used to be a Conservative stronghold. But boundary changes have given a more inner-city "feel" to the constituency even though it remains suburban and middle-class. At the last election, Labour emerged with a majority of just over 5,000 over the Liberal Democrats – a considerable drop in the majority compared with the previous two elections. The sitting MP Jane Kennedy, who entered Parliament in 1992 for the now extinct Liverpool Broadgreen seat, announced that she would not be standing in this election.LIVERPOOL WEST DERBYThis seat, which covers north-east suburban Liverpool, including Ken Dodd's famed Knotty Ash area, is a sure-fire Labour stronghold with its large council estates. At the last election, Labour registered a majority of over 15,000 over the Liberal Democrats. In 2001, this was the only constituency in England where a minor party - the separate Liberal Party - came second. This was a Tory-held seat in the 1960s, but their vote has dropped significantly and they have come fourth in the last three elections. The sitting MP Robert Wareing has said he will stand as an independent, The official Labour candidate is Stephen Twigg who famously ousted Michael Portillo in Enfield Southgate in 1997.LIVINGSTONThis constituency was formed from parts of the old Midlothian and West Lothian constituencies in 1983. The constituency is dominated by Livingston New Town with its preponderance of electronic industries. And it has acquired the nickname, "Silicon Glen". It is in Labour hands but the Scottish Nationalist will be scenting victory at this election: in a 2005 by-election they were fewer than 3,000 votes behind Labour, presenting the prospect of a tough battle. The sitting MP Jim Devine has been banned by the Labour Party from standing at this election in the wake of the expenses row. He entered the Commons in the by-election caused by the sudden death of the former Foreign Secretary Robin Cook.LLANELLIThis is a safe Labour seat in South Wales, a proud centre of Rugby football where the principal challengers are Plaid Cymru, although Labour at the moment enjoys a comfortable majority of 7,234. The sitting MP, who entered Parliament at the last general election, is a former teacher and schools' inspector, Nia Griffith, a one-time sheriff of Carmarthen, who speaks five languages, English, Welsh, Italian, Spanish and French. She served as Parliamentary Private Secretary to Harriet Harman, Leader of the Commons and deputy leader of the Labour Party.LONDONDERRY EASTThis largely rural constituency, with areas of scenic beauty on the north coast of Northern Ireland, is overwhelming unionist, though in many elections nationalists have polled close to 33% of the vote. The main interest in elections has been the contest between the Ulster Unionist Party and the Democratic Unionist Party. The UUP were normally ahead of the DUP until the 2001 general election when the DUP finally overtook them. At the last election the DUP secured a majority of some 7,700 over the UUP. The sitting MP, Gregory Campbell, a former civil servant, wrested the seat from the UUP in 2001. He is that rarity: a member of the DUP who supported the Good Friday Agreement.LOUGHBOROUGHThis north Leicestershire seat is now a critical marginal which the Conservatives will be hoping to win back from Labour. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority of under 2,000 over the Conservatives, so a bitter struggle seems inevitable. Labour wrested the seat from the Tories in 1997 and have held it ever since. Loughborough, an East Midlands market town, was a traditional engineering centre, with textiles, now supplemented by a high tech, sporting university and research and development. The sitting MP Andy Reed won the seat in 1997 having failed at the previous election. He is regarded as a Blairite, but became the first member of the Government to resign over Iraq.LOUTH AND HORNCASTLEThis is a safe Conservative seat of farmland and seaside towns, including Mablethorpe, and also inland Lincolnshire. At the last general election, the Tories secured a majority over Labour of almost 10,000. The sitting MP is Sir Peter Tapsell, the only present Member of the House of Commons to have been elected in the 1950s. However, he has broken service, but if, as expected, he wins this election, he will nevertheless be Father of the House in the next Parliament.LUDLOWThis Shropshire seat is a critical marginal between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. At the last election the Tories wrested the seat back from the Liberal Democrats with a majority of just over 2,000 – so it is certainly up for grabs this time. The constituency covers much of southern Shropshire, hilly and rural with an abundance of small towns. It appears to be increasingly middle-class. The sitting MP Old Etonian Philip Dunne is an investment banker.LUTON NORTHThis Labour-held constituency comprises the northern half of what has been described as "a tough town". It includes all urban wards. The main employer in the constituency is the Luton and Dunstable Hospital and many constituents work at nearby London Luton Airport. Labour secured a majority of just short of 6,500 over the Conservatives in 2005, so it is by no means a foregone conclusion that Labour will retain it this time. The sitting MP Kelvin Hopkins was elected as MP for Luton North in the Labour landslide of 1997. He is on the left wing of the party but is well known – and respected – for using gentle persuasion rather than ranting tactics to get his message across.LUTON SOUTHThis constituency, and its predecessors in the same area, has returned an MP of the winning party at every election since 1951. The seat is dominated by the airport and the closing Vauxhall car plant. At present it is held by Labour with a majority of 5,650 over the Conservatives. But the introduction of independent candidates this time, including the TV star Esther Rantzen, may substantially upset the balance. The sitting MP Margaret Moran has said she would not fight this election in the wake of the expenses row. Subsequently the Labour Party barred her from standing as their candidate this time.MACCLESFIELDThis seat covers the north-eastern part of the Cheshire East unitary authority. Much of the constituency is commuter territory for Manchester, with affluent villages such as Prestbury. Macclesfield itself is a prosperous town at the foot of Cheshire's Peak hills. It is regarded as good Tory territory and at the last election the party recorded a majority of nearly 9,500 over Labour. The sitting MP Sir Nicholas Winterton, who has represented the seat since 1971, is not standing at this election.MAIDENHEADThis constituency includes Thames-side towns such as Twyford, Cookham and Sonning in addition to Maidenhead itself. The Tories, who are favourites to retain it, won it at the last election with a majority of something over 6,000 votes, around twice their majority at the previous general election. The sitting Tory MP is Theresa May, a former banker, and famous for her leopard kitten heels. She is probably the most prominent woman member of the Parliamentary Conservative Party.MAIDSTONE AND THE WEALDThis Tory safe constituency, in the middle of Kent, was created for the 1997 general election. Most of the electorate live in urban Maidstone, which has some light industry but whose economy is increasingly dominated by the service sector, such as insurance. The south of the constituency is rural with significant orchards and market gardens. Many residents commute to London. At the last election, the Conservatives registered a majority of nearly 15,000 over Labour. The seat has been represented, since its creation, by feisty Ann Widdecombe, who for ten years before that represented the former seat of Maidstone. She is not standing at this election. The new Tory candidate is Helen Grant, a solicitor, who, if elected, could become the Conservatives' first black woman MP.MAKERFIELDMakerfield in Greater Manchester, is, and has historically been, one of the safest Labour seats in the country. With its predecessor constituencies, it has been held by Labour since the Parliamentary Labour Party was formed in 1906. It consists of the western and central section of Wigan. This former coalfield constituency has been described as "very white and very Labour". At the last election, Labour recorded a majority of more than 18,000 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Ian McCartney has held several Government posts. At only 5ft 1in he was one of the shortest male MPs at Westminster. He is not standing this time on health grounds.MALDONThis is a new seat drawn from the disappearing Maldon and East Chelmsford constituency. Experts have calculated that had it existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Tories would have won it with a majority of over 13,500. The area has previously been represented by Labour's Tom Driberg and John, now Lord, Wakeham, a Cabinet Minister in the Margaret Thatcher years. The Tory candidate will be John Whittingdale, a former political secretary to Margaret Thatcher. He currently sits for Maldon and East Chelmsford. As well as the ancient port of Maldon, the constituency also covers the riverside town of Burnham-on-Crouch and several villages. The area includes the site of a crucial battle in 991 between Saxons and Danes. MANCHESTER CENTRALThis Labour stronghold has traditionally one of the lowest voter turn-outs of any constituency in UK general elections. In 2009 it was shown to have the second highest unemployment rate in Britain at 15%. At the last election, Labour secured a majority of more than 9,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Labour MP is Tony Lloyd, a former accountant, who entered Parliament as MP for Stretford in 1983. Following boundary changes in 1997, he has represented Manchester Central since then.MANCHESTER GORTONWith the exception of the 1931 general election, this seat has been held by Labour since 1906. This seat in south-east Manchester has high unemployment. Labour retained it with a majority of nearly 6,000 over the Liberal Democrats at the last general election. Veteran Labour MP Sir Gerald Kaufman, 79, is to fight the seat again this time. Sir Gerald entered Parliament in 1970 as MP for Manchester Ardwick and from 1983 for Manchester Gorton. He famously dubbed Labour's left-wing election manifesto in 1983 as "the longest suicide note in history".MANCHESTER WITHINGTONThis was once a Conservative stronghold: but no longer. Then it became a safe Labour seat, but at the last election the Liberal Democrats destroyed an 11,500 Labour majority to win the seat for themselves with a majority of 667. It was one of the shocks of the 2005 general election. Labour blamed the area's student population's dislike of the party's higher education policy for the defeat. The seat consists of gentrifying Manchester suburbs, an ageing population and many public sector workers. John Leech, the sitting MP, became the first Liberal Democrat or Liberal to win a Manchester seat since 1929.MANSFIELDThis is a constituency with a coal mining tradition. Mansfield has been held by the Labour Party for generations. It has usually been regarded as a safe seat for them, however they came close to losing it in 1987, probably a legacy of the earlier miners' strike which many Nottinghamshire miners did not support. However, at the last election, Labour secured a majority of approaching 11,500 over the Tories. The sitting MP Alan Meale has represented the seat since 1987. He is a former Merchant Navy seaman. MEON VALLEYThis is a new constituency, an additional one for Hampshire, including the towns of Waterlooville and Horndean, covering commuter areas for Portsmouth. It shows all the signs of becoming a marginal between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. Experts have calculated that had it existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Tories would have won it, by a majority of only 2,400 over the Liberal Democrats.MERIDENAt the very heart of England, the Meriden constituency is an area of stark contrasts, ranging from the rural pasture of Warwickshire to the urban outskirts of Birmingham. This used to be a marginal seat between Labour and the Conservatives, but it now appears to be safely in the hands of the Tories. The Conservatives retained it at the last election with a majority of just over 7,000 over Labour. The sitting Tory MP is Caroline Spelman, a former chairman of the Conservative Party. She won the seat in 1997 and has been its MP ever since.MERTHYR TYDFIL AND RHYMNEYThis is a rock-solid Labour stronghold in Wales, running from the Brecon Beacons National Park through the valleys, with Merthyr as its biggest town. It is plainly a no-hoper for any party other than Labour. At the last general election, Labour registered a majority of almost 14,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Labour MP Dai Havard, a one-time union official, has held the seat since 2001.MIDDLESBROUGHThis famous industrial city can be regarded as a Labour stronghold. It is predominantly working class, with high unemployment. At the last general election, Labour romped home with a majority of just over 12,500 over the Conservatives. The sitting Labour MP is Sir Stuart Bell, a former journalist, barrister and colliery clerk. He first represented Middlesbrough at Westminster in 1983.MIDDLESBROUGH SOUTH AND CLEVELAND EASTThis constituency, which is very much Labour-inclined, includes the seaside town of Saltburn, some farming land as well as the suburbs of Middlesbrough. At the last general election, Labour's Ashok Kumar secured a majority of precisely 8,000 over the Conservatives. Tributes were paid to the chartered engineer after he was found dead at his home on March 15, 2010. Prime Minister Gordon Brown said Mr Kumar was "a tenacious campaigner" and "a warm and incredibly generous man". A post-mortem examination revealed that the 53-year-old's death was from natural causes.MIDLOTHIANThis constituency, including the ancient Scottish town south-east of Edinburgh and a former coalfield area, is safe Labour territory. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority of something over 7,200 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP, former miner David Hamilton, has represented the constituency at Westminster since 2001. Midlothian was once represented by the former Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone.MILTON KEYNES NORTHThis is a new constituency in the new town that became a city. It derived largely from the disappearing seat of Milton Keynes North-East and promises to be a crucial marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. Experts have calculated that if it had existed for the 2005 general election, Labour would have scraped home with a majority of just 848 votes over the Tories. The Tory candidate will be Mark Lancaster, the current sitting MP for Milton Keynes North-East, a former fireworks manufacturer.MILTON KEYNES SOUTHThis is a new seat based on the disappearing Milton Keynes South West constituency. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have won it but by a margin of below 1,500 over the Conservatives. So it has the makings of another key marginal seat. As well as parts of the new city, it includes the Victorian railway town of Bletchley and Bletchley Park, hailed as the birthplace of the modern computer, where the German Enigma code was broken in the Second World War.MITCHAM AND MORDENThis commuter-belt constituency, comprising the southern half of the London borough of Merton, is now in safe Labour hands, although in the past it has voted Conservative. At the last election, Labour recorded a 12,500 majority over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Siobhain McDonagh won the seat first in 1997 under an all-woman short list procedure. She is a former civil servant. Morden is the end of the Northern Line tube and a tunnel that was the longest in the world until fairly recently but now overtaken by the Channel Tunnel and others.MOLE VALLEYThis is an impregnable Tory stronghold which regularly returns Conservative majorities exceeding 10,000 – even in 1997, the year of Labour's massive landslide triumph. The constituency has a reputation of being one of the safest places to live in the country, with its affluent middle-class commuter towns, including Dorking, and villages. At the last election, the Tories registered a majority of almost 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP New Zealand–born Sir Paul Beresford is a dentist.MONMOUTHThis rural constituency, which covers the border valleys between England and Wales, has changed hands between Labour and Conservative several times in recent elections. It is now held by the Tories, but with a majority of around 4,500, which makes it possibly winnable by Labour again. However, in the current political climate, it seems likely to remain in Conservative hands. The sitting Conservative MP is David Davies – not to be confused with the former shadow Home Secretary David Davis – who is a prominent supporter of the Better Off Out movement which campaigns for Britain to leave the European Union.MONTGOMERYSHIREThis Welsh seat is one of the most rural and isolated constituencies in the United Kingdom. It is one of the small handful of seats which the Liberal Democrats can call safe. Apart from the 1979 general election, when the Tories captured the seat, Montgomeryshire has returned a Liberal affiliated or Liberal Democrat candidate on every occasion since 1880. The Liberal Democrat majority at the last election was 7,100 over the Conservatives. The current MP, Lembit Opik, who is of Estonian descent although he was born in Northern Ireland, is one of the most colourful characters at Westminster. He has enjoyed massive publicity over his celebrity girl friends – and worries that the Earth will be hit by an asteroid.MORAYThis seat, which covers the whole of the Moray council area, has been in Scottish Nationalist hands since 1987, and looks as though it will remain an SNP constituency after this election. At the last election, the SNP romped home with a majority of more than 5,500 over the Conservatives. The seat, a rural constituency in north-east Scotland including the town of Elgin, is held by Angus Robertson, who leads the SNP in the House of Commons. The party's overall leader Alex Salmond who is also an MP attends Westminster less frequently than before, since he became Scotland's First Minister.MORECAMBE AND LUNESDALEThis seat brings together the northern rural reaches of Lancashire, including Carnforth on the Cumbria border, and the seaside resort of Morecambe and the nuclear power station/ferry port village of Heysham. This was once a safe Tory seat but Morecambe, like its neighbour Blackpool, elected a Labour MP in 1997 and has done so ever since. At the last election, Labour registered a majority of some 4,700 over the Conservatives, so it is still capable of being returned to the Tories at this election. The sitting Labour MP is the outspoken Geraldine Smith, who was a ferocious critic of John Prescott, the former deputy Prime Minister. She has also denounced as madness that someone could have a birth certificate showing two mothers and no father.MORLEY AND OUTWOODThis is a new constituency in West Yorkshire which will almost certainly be a Labour stronghold. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the last general election, Labour would have romped home with a majority exceeding 8,500 over the Conservatives. The Labour candidate will be Ed Balls, the Schools Secretary, and, it is rumoured, a would-be Labour Party leader, whose own Yorkshire seat, Normanton, is disappearing under boundary changes. The new constituency merges part of Leeds, including the town of Morley, with a slice of Wakefield City.MOTHERWELL AND WISHAWThis constituency, to the south-west of North Lanarkshire, is an impregnable Labour stronghold. It was once home to the Ravenscraig steel plant, now closed. It is a reportedly hard-hit working class constituency. At the last general election, the party triumphed with a majority exceeding 15,000 over the Scottish Nationalists. The sitting Labour MP Frank Roy formerly worked for British Steel at Ravenscraig. He first won the seat in 1997 and is the first locally-born MP to have represented the area at Westminster. NA H-EILEANAN AN IAR (WESTERN ISLES) The constituency area is that of the Outer Hebrides. It has one of the largest areas - it is 130 miles long - but the smallest electorate of any constituency in the United Kingdom, one-fifth of the size of the largest, the Isle of Wight. The seat, in which there are a majority of Gaelic speakers, has been a two-way marginal between the Labour Party and the Scottish National Party for many years. In the 2005 general election it was one of only two seats outside Northern Ireland in which the Conservative Party obtained less than 5% of the vote and was pushed into fifth place - the other was Blaenau Gwent in Wales. At the last election, the SNP recaptured it from Labour but with a majority of only 1,441. The sitting SNP MP Angus MacNeil sparked off the police inquiry into the cash-for-peerages allegations.NEATHThis constituency is a mixture of both industrial and rural communities, running in a north-south strip along the dips, ridges and folded landscape of South Wales. It includes most of the Neath and Dulais valleys, and some of the Upper Swansea Valley as well. The constituency was heavily mined and the small communities that grew up around these mines were devastated by the collapse of the mining industry in the 1980s. It is an impregnable Labour stronghold. The party recorded a majority approaching 13,000 over Plaid Cymru at the last election. The sitting MP is former anti-apartheid campaigner Peter Hain, who won it in 1992 and has been its MP ever since. He is the Welsh Secretary.NEW FOREST EASTThe Hampshire constituency includes the central forest villages of Lyndhurst, Brockenhurst and Beaulieu. The constituency includes a firm called Millbrook Furnishings which maintains and upholsters the green benches of the House of Commons. It is held by the Conservatives, but the Liberal Democrats are snapping at their heels. At the last election, the Tories retained the seat with a majority of 6,500 over the Lib Dems who have specifically targeted this seat at this general election. The sitting MP Dr Julian Lewis is a defence expert, and has been described as the Tories' "front-bench terrier".NEW FOREST WESTThis rock-solid Tory seat in Hampshire reaches the borders of Bournemouth and includes coastal and forest areas. Its main population centres are the towns of Lymington and Ringwood. At the last election, the Tories romped home with a majority exceeding 17,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Tory MP is Desmond Swayne who has acted as parliamentary private secretary to the Conservative leader David Cameron. Mr Swayne served in Iraq with the Territorial Army.NEWARKThis east Nottinghamshire seat, which loses the town of Retford at this election through boundary changes, is in Conservative hands at the moment, and should remain so after this election. However, Labour, which has recently held the seat, is not too far behind. In 2005, the Tories retained the constituency with a majority of 6,464 over Labour. The sitting MP defence expert Patrick Mercer, a former officer in the Sherwood Foresters, has also worked as a radio journalist. In 2007 he had to resign from his front-bench post as Homeland Security spokesman, after making allegedly racist remarks. W E Gladstone represented this seat in the Commons in the 1830s – his first parliamentary seat – before moving on to other constituencies. In the 17th century civil war Charles I surrendered to the Scots here. NEWBURYThis west Berkshire constituency is a cliff-hanging marginal between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. It is at the moment in Tory hands, the Conservatives having wrested it in 2005 from the Liberal Democrats who had held it for 12 years. But the Tory majority is under 3,500 and is therefore vulnerable to a Lib Dem attack. Over the constituency's history there have been 11 different MPs. Of those, all but three have been Conservatives. The total period served by either a Liberal or Liberal Democrat MP is 17 years, Conservative MPs have served for the remaining 103 years. The constituency includes Greenham Common Airbase, the launch-pad for D-Day in the Second World War, and the target of anti-nuclear protests. The sitting MP Richard Benyon, served in Northern Ireland and the Far East with the Royal Green Jackets.NEWCASTLE UNDER LYMEThis is an ex-mining constituency in the Potteries, with new industries springing up. It contains the famous Keele University. The seat is a safe Labour haven, enjoying a majority at the last general election of more than 8,000 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Paul Farrelly has wide experience as a business journalist. Mr Farrelly, who entered Parliament in 2001, is the first local-born Member to represent this constituency in more than a 100 years.NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE CENTRALConfusingly this Labour-held seat does not at the moment include Newcastle's commercial city centre. It consists of a number of fairly prosperous communities and houses a large student population, a reason for a substantial swing towards the Liberal Democrats here in 2005, due to student hostility to Labour's policy of top-up fees. Labour held on to it in 2005 with a majority of under 4,000, virtually only a quarter of their majority over the Lib Dems in 2001. The sitting Labour MP left-winger Jim Cousins who has held the seat since 1987 will not be fighting this election. The Labour candidate is Chinyelu Susan Onwurah who could become the North of England's first black woman MP.NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE EASTThis is a new seat for this election and all the signs are that it will become a Labour stronghold. Experts have calculated that had it existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have romped home with a majority of almost 7,000 over the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives a long way behind. The Labour candidate will be Nick Brown, the Government chief whip, who at present represents the disappearing seat of Newcastle upon Tyne East and Wallsend. Under the new arrangements Wallsend moves to the North Tyneside seat.NEWCASTLE UPON TYNE NORTHThis Labour-held northern urban Newcastle seat is centred on Gosforth and includes the local airport. It is at the moment safely in Labour hands, with a majority at the last general election of more than 7,000 over the Liberal Democrats. But that majority was less than half what it was at the 2001 general election. The sitting MP Douglas Henderson, a former chairman of the Scottish Labour Party, has represented the seat since 1987 and is standing down this time.NEWPORT EASTLabour have held this South Wales seat since it was first created in 1983. At the moment Labour have a majority of nearly 7,000 over the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives only a whisker behind the Lib Dems in third place. Newport is the "first" town in Wales coming in from the M4 and this constituency includes the closing Llanwern steelworks. The sitting MP is Jessica Morden, a former general secretary of the Welsh Labour Party. She entered Parliament in 2005, becoming the first female MP ever to represent this part of the world.NEWPORT WESTThis Labour-held seat borders on the River Usk and the Bristol Channel. It is largely a middle-class residential area but with a considerable rural content as well. Labour wrested it from the Conservatives in 1987 and have held it ever since, on the last occasion with a majority of almost 5,500. The sitting Labour MP is Paul Flynn, an outspoken left-winger and a bitter opponent of Britain's involvement in Afghanistan.NEWRY AND ARMAGHThis Northern Ireland seat is overwhelmingly Nationalist, although in its first year of creation, 1983, the Unionists captured it because of divisions in the Nationalist vote. At the last election Sinn Fein ousted the Social Democrat and Labour Party with a majority of around 8,000. This seat contains what was once known as IRA "bandit country" including rolling border countryside around Crossmaglen and Newry itself. The sitting MP Conor Murphy refuses to take his seat in line with the abstentionist policy of Sinn Féin. In 1982 he was sentenced to five years in prison for IRA membership and possession of explosives.NEWTON ABBOTThis is a new rural constituency in Devon, entirely within the district of Teignbridge, a constituency which disappears as such at this election. The area includes the town of Newton Abbot, the port of Teignmouth and the seaside resort of Dawlish linked by one of the country’s most picturesque rail lines which is sometimes at risk from the sea. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Liberal Democrats would have won it with a majority of slightly more than 4,500 over the Conservatives. The Liberal Democrat candidate is Richard Younger-Ross, the current MP for Teignbridge, who entered Parliament in 2001. He is a former architectural consultant. NORFOLK MIDThis Tory-held East Anglian seat is considerably changed from its predecessor of the same name, but, according to experts will continue to return a Conservative MP this time. The Tories had a majority of some 7,500 over Labour here at the last election, and the prediction is that this majority in the revised seat will not be much different at this election. This is geographically a large seat, with few towns but many villages. The sitting Tory MP Keith Simpson, a military historian, entered Parliament in 1997. He is to fight the new seat of Broadland at this election.NORFOLK NORTHThis rambling East Anglian seat has been held by the Liberal Democrats since 2001 after years in Tory hands. At the last election, the Lib Dems astonishingly increased their majority of 483 in 2001 to more than 10,500 in 2005. Before that the seat had been in Labour hands for 25 years following the Second World War but they have now slumped to third place. North Norfolk was once described as "the one constituency in England where, in 1964, it was so feudal that it had to be explained to the electors that the ballot was secret". The constituency covers the coastal area around Sheringham and Cromer plus some of the Broads. The sitting Lib Dem MP is Norman Lamb, a solicitor and one-time member of Norwich City Council.NORFOLK NORTH WESTThis mainly rural seat, including the old town of King's Lynn and the seaside resort of Hunstanton, has been in Conservative hands since 1974, and is expected to remain so after this election. The Tories will be defending a majority this time of more than 9,000 over Labour. The sitting MP is Old Etonian Henry Bellingham, a barrister. Mr Bellingham is a direct descendant of John Bellingham, the man who assassinated Prime Minister Spencer Perceval in 1812. NORFOLK SOUTHThis rural, largely middle-class constituency has many small villages within its boundaries. It is now regarded as a Conservative stronghold. It stretches from the suburbs of Norwich to the town of Diss on the Suffolk border. The Tories will be defending a majority of some 8.700 over the Liberal Democrats at this general election. The sitting Conservative MP is Richard Bacon who entered Parliament in 2001. He is a former public relations consultant and financial journalist. NORFOLK SOUTH WESTThis rural constituency, which includes the towns of Swaffham, Downham Market and Thetford, as well as military training grounds, has been held solidly by Conservatives since 1964 but for twenty years before then, it had been a Labour-Conservative ultra-marginal. The Conservatives had a majority of more than 10,000 over Labour in 2005. The sitting MP Christopher Fraser, an expert in the communications industry, has announced he will not be fighting this election.NORMANTON, PONTEFRACT AND CASTLEFORDThis is a new seat in South Yorkshire, comprising many ex-mining towns and villages. Experts have calculated that had it existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have triumphed with a massive majority of more than 20,500. This constituency is the "offspring" of the decision to reduce by one, because of population decline, the number of Parliamentary seats in West Yorkshire. The Labour candidate for this seat is Yvette Cooper, Secretary of State for Work and Pensions, who at present sits for the disappearing constituency of Pontefract and Castleford. She is married to Ed Balls, the Schools Secretary.NORTHAMPTON NORTHLabour will be defending a majority over the Conservatives of under 4,000 making it a readily winnable seat for the Tories given the current political climate. It has been Tory-held in the recent past. This area is a designated new town with a growing population and substantial local authority housing. The present MP is Sally Keeble, a former journalist and press officer for the Labour Party. She was educated at Cheltenham Ladies' College.NORTHAMPTON SOUTHThe Tories regained this part-rural seat from Labour in 2005 with a majority of under 4,500 so it cannot be regarded as a safe Conservative constituency. It would have probably stayed Labour if the latest boundary changes, losing rural areas, had been in force last time . The seat contains many affluent commuters in the Northampton area. The sitting MP is Brian Binley who entered Parliament in 2005. Mr Binley is a successful businessman and a Euro-sceptic, once warning the Tories that some Conservatives might well feel obliged to vote for Ukip. NORTHAMPTONSHIRE SOUTHThis is a new, or rather re-created, seat which takes in parts of the existing Daventry constituency. It stretches from Northampton’s suburbs out into the countryside and includes Silverstone’s Grand Prix circuit . Experts have predicted that this will become a Conservative stronghold, and are forecasting a Tory majority this time of around 11,300. The Conservative candidate is Andrea Leadsom, a former head of Barclays Bank Investment team. NORWICH NORTHThis constituency has been in Labour's hands for most of its existence since 1950, but in a shock by-election result in 2009, the Tories overturned a 5,500 majority secured by Labour in 2005 to a majority of 7,300 for themselves. This was a huge boost for David Cameron, the Tory leader. The seat comprises what have been described as Norwich's "less grand" suburbs containing substantial areas of council housing. The new MP Chloe Smith, at 27 is the youngest at Westminster, and also the youngest woman ever to have represented the Tories in the House of Commons. However boundary changes lop off some pro-Tory areas north of the city boundaries and she will have a fight to keep her seat. NORWICH SOUTHThis used to be Labour's safest seat in Norfolk – but no longer. It is now a three-way, possibly a four-way marginal, at present in the hands of Labour, but with the Liberal Democrats, who were runners-up, and the Tories creeping up dangerously closely behind. The Greens, who did not do well in 2005 in this seat, but who are now popular in the city, are also making a determined onslaught. Labour held it with a majority of a very vulnerable 3,600 last time. The sitting MP is Charles Clarke, the former Home Secretary, and a huge critic of Gordon Brown's leadership. Norwich was once famous for having a church for every week in the year and a pub for every day.NOTTINGHAM EASTThis constituency has had a chequered history. It was formerly regarded as an ultra-safe Labour haven, but the Tories snatched it from them in 1983 and held it again in 1987 until Labour regained it in 1992 and have held it ever since. Labour's majority over the Liberal Democrats in 2005 was nearly 7,000 with the Lib Dems and the Tories fighting it out for second place. This is a long, thin seat on the edge of Nottingham with a mix of suburbs and council estates. The sitting Labour MP John Heppell, a former railway diesel fitter, entered Parliament in 1992.NOTTINGHAM NORTHThe majority of the seat consists of large council estates and residential areas. Unemployment is high. It is the most working-class of the Nottingham constituencies, and thus the safest for Labour. It is also the only city constituency in the United Kingdom to contain a coal mine - albeit now disused. It was the decline of the mining and textile industries which brought about the high unemployment here. Labour go into this election defending a majority of over 12,000. The sitting MP is Graham Allen who is an enthusiastic proponent of constitutional reform. He recently introduced a Bill calling for a written constitution.NOTTINGHAM SOUTH Nottingham South is the most diverse of the three city constituencies. It includes areas of large wealth in the form of Wollaton and the Park and areas of relative poverty, with the Clifton estate, at one time the largest council estate in Europe, as well as the University of Nottingham and Nottingham Trent University. It is also the most marginal of Nottingham's three constituencies. The Tories held it from 1983-92 but in recent years it has remained more or less safe for Labour. The current Labour majority is nearly 7,500 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP left-winger Alan Simpson is not fighting this election.NUNEATONThis Warwickshire seat, with its strong industrial and mining tradition, used to be regarded as a safe Labour haven, but it is now very much a marginal. Labour go into battle this time defending a 2005 majority of under 2,300 over the Conservatives which would have been slightly boosted by the latest boundary changes, so it is a constituency which the Tories will hope to win. The sitting MP, Bill Olner, a former engineer who entered Parliament in 1992, is retiring at this election.OCHIL AND PERTHSHIRE SOUTHThis is a desperately critical marginal Scottish seat between Labour and the Scottish Nationalists. At the last election, Labour held on by the skin of their teeth: a majority of just 688 over the SNP, with the Conservatives not far behind them. The constituency includes many fine golf courses and is a tourists' paradise. The sitting MP Gordon Banks, who entered Parliament at the last general election, is a construction engineer.OGMOREThis is a rock-solid Labour seat in South Wales. At the last election, the party romped home with a majority of approaching 14,000 over the Liberal Democrats. But the Lib Dems, the Tories and Plaid Cymru each polled around the 3,000-4,000 mark. The constituency comprises former mining valleys west of Cardiff. The sitting MP Huw Irranca-Davies entered Parliament at a by-election in 2002. He is a former lecturer at Swansea Institute for Higher Education.OLD BEXLEY AND SIDCUPThis suburban outer London south-east seat is a relatively safe Conservative haven. Sir Edward Heath, the former Tory Prime Minister, represented the area for around half-a-century. The Tories retained the seat at the last election with a majority of nearly 10,000 over Labour. However, the present incumbent, Derek Conway, who won the seat as a Conservative in 2005 subsequently had the Tory whip withdrawn and has been sitting as an independent. The new Conservative candidate will be James Brokenshire, the current MP for Hornchurch, which disappears as a constituency in its own right.OLDHAM EAST AND SADDLEWORTHThis is the largest constituency in Greater Manchester, and since 1997 has been a Labour/Liberal Democrat marginal. Labour held on to it last time, but with a majority of barely over 3,500, so it is highly vulnerable to a resolute Lib Dem attack. The constituency is a mix of terraced houses and the Pennine hills. There is also considerable British National Party support here. At the 2001 general election, the BNP polled 5,000 votes and in 2005 some 2,000 votes. The sitting Labour MP Phil Woolas was famously publicly "handbagged" as the responsible minister, by Joanna Lumley during her campaign on behalf of the Gurkhas.OLDHAM WEST AND ROYTONThis is a safe Labour seat which has been held by former Minister Michael Meacher since 1970. Like its neighbouring seat, Oldham East and Saddleworth, this constituency also has relatively high support for the British National Party. In 2001, Nick Griffin, the BNP leader, polled 6,500 votes, pushing the Liberal Democrats into fourth place and finishing third just behind the Tories. In 2005, the BNP polled 2,600 votes and came fourth, while Labour triumphed with a majority of just short of 10,500. Meacher is an assiduous environmentalist and will be fighting this election as one of Labour's "elder statesmen". ORKNEY AND SHETLANDThis far-flung constituency, the most northerly in the United Kingdom, has elected only Liberal or Liberal Democrat MPs since 1950 – the longest run of any United Kingdom constituency. It was once the seat occupied by the former Liberal leader, Jo Grimond. At the last election the Liberal Democrats recorded a majority of 6,600 over Labour, a more substantial majority than it sounds, given the relatively low electorate. The sitting MP Alistair Carmichael is a solicitor and Elder of the Church of Scotland. For some Shetland residents the nearest railway station is in Norway. ORPINGTONThis Kent green belt dormitory town seat, with many commuters among the electorate, was once an impregnable Tory stronghold, but has become a critical marginal between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. It is in Tory hands at the moment, but with a majority of under 5,000. The seat is famous for its 1962 by-election. A shock win by Eric Lubbock of the Liberal Party, now Lord Avebury, was one factor in bringing 13 years of Tory rule to an end. The sitting MP John Horam, who will not be fighting this election, uniquely has served as a Labour, SDP and Tory MP at Westminster.OXFORD EASTThis is the most Labour voting part of Oxford, with its Cowley factory – and also gentrifying terraces – but the party had a shock at the last election, with its normally safe majority reduced to below 1,000. This was because the high student population came close to voting the Liberal Democrats in because of their opposition to the Labour Government's policy on top-up fees and also the war in Iraq. The sitting MP Andrew Smith, a former Cabinet minister, has represented the seat since 1987.OXFORD WEST AND ABINGDONThis seat contains many of the Oxford colleges and thus has a high student population. The Liberal Democrats wrested it from the Conservatives in 1997 and have held it ever since. The Lib Dems had a majority of nearly 7,700 at the 2005 election. The sitting MP Dr Evan Harris, was in 2009 presented, along with his colleague Lord Avebury, with the National Secular Society's Secularist of the Year award.PAISLEY AND RENFREWSHIRE NORTHThis constituency, which was formed in 2005, is a safe Labour seat. The party will be defending a majority this time of just over 11, 000, with the Scottish Nationalists as runners-up. The sitting MP Jim Sheridan, a former shipyard worker and printer, sat for Renfrewshire West from 2001 until 2005 when that constituency was abolished. Sheridan once resigned from a junior Government post because of Labour's policy towards the Middle East. The constituency is bounded by the Clyde and includes the towns of Renfrew and Linwood. PAISLEY AND RENFREWSHIRE SOUTHThis is a rock-solid Labour seat which was created in 2005. Labour will be defending a majority over the Liberal Democrats of 13,000 at this election. This seat comprises most of Paisley town centre west of Glasgow. The seat is held by Douglas Alexander, the International Development Secretary. Gordon Brown has appointed him as Labour's general election coordinator.PENDLEThis constituency comprises the towns of Nelson and Colne. Pendle is a place of contrasts - beautiful countryside, industrial heritage, modern facilities and brooding moors. The Leeds and Liverpool Canal snakes through the major towns, once a focal point of the industrial age but now a quiet waterway. It is at the moment in Labour hands, but the Conservatives, who are not far behind, are hoping it will go their way this time. Labour's majority at the last election was barely over 2,000, so it remains prominently on the Tory target list. The sitting Member, Gordon Prentice, is one of the most active campaigning MPs at Westminster. He was one of the few Labour MPs who did not endorse Gordon Brown for the leadership in 2007.PENISTONE AND STOCKSBRIDGEThis is a new South Yorkshire constituency which shows all the signs of becoming a Labour stronghold. Experts have calculated that if this seat had existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have romped home with a majority of nearly 9,000. The seat is most heavily populated on its eastern fringe, with communities built largely on the coal and steel industries. The new Labour candidate will be Angela Smith, who has been MP for Sheffield Hillsborough since 2005. That seat disappears under boundary redistribution. It includes the town of Penistone and Sheffield suburbs. PENRITH AND THE BORDERThis is a safe Conservative seat on the England/Scotland border. It is the largest constituency by area in England but one of the most sparsely populated. It completely encircles Carlisle and stretches nearly to Gretna Green in the north and to the Yorkshire Dales in the South. It was represented for three decades by Willie Whitelaw, who was Margaret Thatcher's right-hand man when she was Prime Minister. At the last election, the Tories sailed home with a majority of some 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP, David Maclean is retiring on health grounds. The new Tory candidate is Rory Stewart, who served with the Black Watch in Iraq and Afghanistan. PERTH AND PERTHSHIRE NORTHThis large, rambling seat is just narrowly in the hands of the Scottish Nationalists, but the Tories were only 1,500 votes behind them at the last general election, so they will be hoping to oust the SNP this time. The sitting MP Peter Wishart was formerly Member for North Tayside, a seat which was abolished in 2005. He is an accomplished musician and a founder member of the parliamentary rock group MP4. Wishart, who ran a band called Runrig, has also appeared on Top of the Pops. The constituency includes the city of Perth and the glens and lochs of Rannoch, Tay and Tummel.PETERBOROUGHThis is a traditionally marginal seat between Labour and the Conservatives. In 1966 it was retained by the Conservatives by a margin of just three votes after 17 recounts. It is at present in the hands of the Tories but only by a margin of under 3,000 votes so this constituency is understandably high on the list of Labour's target seats. The Tories regained it last time after it fell into the hands of Labour for two successive elections. Stewart Jackson, the sitting Tory MP for this ancient cathedral city, is a banker.PLYMOUTH MOOR VIEWThis is a new constituency, largely a successor to the old Plymouth Devonport constituency, covering housing estates to the north of the city. Experts have calculated that had this seat been in existence for the 2005 general election, Labour would have held it with a majority of over 7,700. The Labour candidate for this seat – with its strong naval background – is Alison Seabeck, a qualified lifeguard. She at present sits for the Plymouth Devonport seat.PLYMOUTH SUTTON AND DEVONPORTThis is a new seat, partly based on the old Plymouth Sutton seat plus parts of Plymouth Devonport, which were two of the oldest constituencies in England. It includes the city centre and the naval base area. Experts have predicted that had this seat been in existence for the 2005 general election, Labour would have won it with a majority of something over 4,500 over the Conservatives, so it cannot be regarded as a safe Labour haven. The Labour candidate is Linda Gilroy, at present MP for Plymouth Sutton. She entered Parliament in 1979 as one of the Blair Babes and has a special interest in the elderly. It was at Plymouth Hoe – covered by this constituency – that in 1588 Francis Drake was alerted to the sighting of the Spanish Armada while he was playing bowls. PONTYPRIDDThis rock-solid Labour constituency comprises the Taff and Ely valleys north west of Cardiff. The southern area contains much new residential and light industrial development, and benefits from good transport links. This section has a growing population and is an important dormitory for Cardiff. The southern parts consist of large sections of 19th century housing and suffered high unemployment in the 1980s as the old industries closed. However economic recovery has been firm. Labour held the seat at the last election with a majority of over 13,000. The sitting MP Kim Howells, who entered Parliament in 1989, is an outspoken left-winger and former National Union of Mineworkers official. He is standing down at this election.POOLEThis growing and well-to-do Dorset town along the coast from Bournemouth is at the moment a safe Conservative haven. At the last election, the Tories retained it with a majority of just short of 6,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Conservative MP Robert Syms entered Parliament in 1997. He is a former managing director of a building and plant hire group. The constituency includes the ferry port and its harbour is popular for sailing. POPLAR AND LIMEHOUSEThis is a new seat in the East End of London. Experts have calculated that if this constituency had existed for the 2005 general election, Labour would have secured it with a majority of something under 4,000 with the Conservatives as runners up. But this pattern may be upset by the appearance of George Galloway, the Respect candidate and former Labour MP. At the last election, he created a major upset by wresting another East End seat, Bethnal Green and Bow, from Labour. The Labour candidate at this election will be Glaswegian Jim Fitzpatrick who sits for the disappearing seat of Poplar and Canning Town. He is a former London fireman. The area has seen new commercial housing development on the old dockland with major population shifts, threatening Labour’s traditional dominance.  PORTSMOUTH NORTHThis constituency covers the relatively affluent northern part of Britain's premier naval base city on the south coast. It is now a critical marginal at present in the hands of Labour but with a majority last time of just 1,100 over the Conservatives, who will be hoping to win it back this time. The sitting Labour MP, Sarah McCarthy-Fry. worked for the multinational defence engineering company GKN Westland at Portsmouth, and more recently as financial controller for GKN Aerospace Services at Cowes, Isle of Wight.PORTSMOUTH SOUTHIn addition to the city centre and ferry-port this constituency also includes the seaside resort of Southsea and naval dockyards. It can be classed as a marginal. At present, the Liberal Democrats hold it, but with a majority of under 3,500 over the Conservatives, so it is understandably high on the Tories' target list this time. The sitting Liberal Democrat MP is Mike Hancock who held the seat from 1984 to 1987, and regained it in 1997.PRESELI PEMBROKESHIRE This is the most westerly constituency in Wales. Much of the coastal area is in the Pembrokeshire Coast National Park. The main towns are Haverfordwest, the ports of Milford Haven and Fishguard and Britain’s smallest city, St David's. The main industries are tourism and farming. It is a critical marginal seat held, at the moment, by the Conservatives with a majority of just over 600 over Labour. So a bitter fight can be expected. The sitting Conservative MP Rugby-playing Stephen Crabb wrested the seat from Labour in 2005.PRESTONThis substantial north-west of England industrial constituency is now a safe Labour seat which the party held at the last election with a majority of almost 9,500 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Mark Hendrick, who is part Somali, is a former electronics engineer and college lecturer. He was a member of the European Parliament for five years, before losing his seat there in 1999. Hendrick won this seat at a by-election in 2000 and has held it ever since.PUDSEYThis seat, sandwiched between the two largest towns in West Yorkshire, Leeds and Bradford, was in Tory hands since 1922 before Labour captured it in 1997 and have held it ever since. At the last election, Labour's majority over the Conservatives was under 6,000, so it remains one of the Tory target seats this time. The sitting MP Paul Truswell is standing down. He is still recovering from the effects of a serious car accident. Pudsey, an affluent area, is the birthplace of cricketing heroes Sir Len Hutton, Brian Close and Ray Illingworth, as well as the fish and chip magnate Harry Ramsden.PUTNEYThis is a compact, smart, riverside constituency nestling on the south bank of the River Thames opposite Fulham. It was the first Conservative gain on election night in 2005, when Justine Greening took back the seat from Labour on a swing of 6.5%. Her majority, though, was under 2,000 so it can be classed as a critical marginal this time. Yorkshire-born Miss Greening was a finance manager before entering Parliament. This was the seat which ousted former Tory Cabinet Minister David Mellor in 1997 – a result which led to angry exchanges between him and the Referendum Party candidate Sir James Goldsmith at the count.RAYLEIGH AND WICKFORDThis is a new constituency derived largely from the disappearing Rayleigh seat, which was the tenth safest Tory seat in the country and their second safest seat in Essex. Experts have calculated that had this commuter-belt constituency existed at the time of the 2005 general election, then the Tories would have romped home with a majority just short of 13,000 over Labour. It is divided between Wickford, an upmarket slice of Basildon Borough, and much of Rochford District.  READING EASTThis is a critically marginal seat with its thousands of London commuters, now in the hands of the Tories, who recaptured it last time from Labour. But the Conservative majority was a mere 475 over Labour last time, so both parties are putting their big guns into this particular campaign. The sitting Tory MP Rob Wilson, who entered Parliament in 2005, has been an Opposition front bench spokesman on higher education. READING WESTThis formerly Conservative-held seat was captured by Labour in 1997 and has been held by them ever since. However, Labour's majority in 2005 was under 5,000, so the Tories will be putting in a lot of effort to regain it this time. The sitting Labour MP Martin Salter, who entered Parliament in 1997, is standing down this time. As well as covering parts of Reading itself, the constituency extends out to the riverside villages of Pangbourne and Purley on Thames. REDCARThis constituency on the Cleveland coast is formed from parts of the Redcar and Cleveland district. It takes its name from the coastal resort of Redcar although much of the population lives in the traditionally solid Labour areas between Redcar and Middlesbrough, with chemical industries and steel plants – one of which is due to be mothballed with the loss of 1,700 jobs. It is now a safe Labour seat. At the last election, Labour romped home with a majority of some 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Labour MP is the stern Vera Baird, the Solicitor General.REDDITCHThis seat, a Worcestershire new town south-west of Birmingham, has been held by Labour ever since it was created in 1997 but their majority at the last election was under 3,000 so the Tories will be hoping to capture it this time. The sitting MP is Jacqui Smith, the former Home Secretary. The British National Party are contesting this seat for the first time.REIGATEThis is a rock-solid Conservative seat in the prosperous heart of Surrey. At the last general election, the Tories swept home with a majority just short of 11,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP Crispin Blunt, who entered Parliament in 1997, was the first Tory Member to call for the resignation of Iain Duncan Smith as Conservative leader. Blunt was an officer in the 13/18 Royal Hussars before becoming an MP.RENFREWSHIRE EASTThe constituency is on the borders of Glasgow, and is mostly middle-class residential territory. It has been described as part of the stockbroker belt south of Glasgow, and was the Tories' safest seat in Scotland until Labour gained the constituency in 1997. It remains in Labour's hands: they retained it with a majority of some 6,500 over the Conservatives in 2005. The sitting Labour MP is Jim Murphy, Secretary of State for Scotland.RHONDDASince 1974, when it was recreated, this constituency has always had a large Labour majority, and in the 1987 general election it was the safest seat for any party, anywhere in the UK. In 2001, it was the only seat in the country where Liberal Democrats lost their deposit, as did the Conservative Party in their worst performance outside Northern Ireland. At the last election, Labour secured a majority of more than 16,000 over Plaid Cymru, and the Tories could not muster even 2,000 votes. Rhondda is the most famous Welsh valley of them all, with its ex-mining communities, chapels and choirs. The sitting Labour MP is Chris Bryant, a former priest and a one-time member of the Conservative Party. He is openly gay.RIBBLE VALLEYThis is one of the few truly safe Conservative seats in North West England. The constituency contains pleasing rural areas, and affluent small market towns of which Clitheroe is the largest. The Tories actually lost the seat to the Liberal Democrats in a 1990s by-election, but it soon returned to the Conservative fold. At the last election, the Tories stormed home with a majority of 14,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting Tory MP Nigel Evans first won the seat in 1992 ands has held it ever since. He owns a convenience shop in Swansea.RICHMOND (YORKS)This seat has the largest percentage Conservative majority in the country although the numerical majority is surpassed by the larger seat of Buckingham. The sitting Member is William Hague, the shadow Foreign Secretary and former Tory Party leader. At the last election he secured a majority of 17,800. Mr Hague won the seat at a by-election in 1989 and has held it ever since. This is an affluent rural area with a significant commuter population, covering parts of the North York Moors and Yorkshire Dales National Parks, including Wensleydale and Swaledale. It contains the market towns of Northallerton, Richmond, Stokesley and Great Ayton as well as the large army base, Catterick Garrison.RICHMOND PARKThis area of west London is almost entirely affluent middle-class suburbia with plenty of leafy streets, and desirable late Victorian and Edwardian houses with large gardens. It has many pleasant open green spaces, including Richmond Park itself and the world famous botanic gardens at Kew. It was formerly a Conservative haven, but has been a Liberal Democrat seat since 1997. At the last election, the Liberal Democrat secured a majority of 3,700 over the Conservatives, who have marked it down as one of their target seats this time. The sitting Liberal Democrat MP Susan Kramer is an ex-candidate for the post of London Mayor. The Tory candidate is the wealthy environmentalist Zac Goldsmith.ROCHDALEThis is a desperately close marginal seat between the Liberal Democrats and Labour, both of whom have held it in recent years. At present it is in Lib Dem hands, but they had a majority of only 444 votes last time. The Conservatives were miles behind. However the latest boundary changes would probably have kept it Labour if they had been in force in 2005. This changing ex-mill town in Greater Manchester has a large Asian community. The Co-operative movement was pioneered here with the opening of the Toad Lane store in 1844. The sitting MP, Paul Rowen, a former science teacher, entered Parliament in 2005.  ROCHESTER AND STROODThis is a new north Kent constituency covering part of the Medway Towns, which represent the largest conurbation in south-east England outside London. It covers the ancient – back to the Romans - city of Rochester with its cathedral and castle and its suburb of Strood. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Conservatives would have won it, but with merely a three-figure majority over Labour. So it will be a fiercely-fought marginal. ROCHFORD AND SOUTHEND EASTThis Tory-held seat covers parts of the popular seaside town of Southend in a commuter area around Shoeburyness. At the last election, the Conservatives retained the seat with a majority of 5,500 over Labour, a considerable drop on their majority at the 2001 general election – possibly as result of the retirement of Sir Teddy Taylor, a highly conscientious constituency MP. The sitting MP, James Duddridge, who entered Parliament in 2005, is a banker.ROMFORDThe constituency covers Romford, Gidea Park and Collier Row in the London Borough of Havering. Although the constituency includes the middle class Romford Garden Suburb area, large housing estates also form part of it and the electorate are mostly working class Conservatives. At the last election, the Tories romped home with a majority of 11,500 over Labour. The sitting MP Andrew Rosindell is a right-wing Eurosceptic famous for campaigning with his Staffordshire Bull Terrier, called Spike, who wears a Union Jack coat.ROMSEY AND SOUTHAMPTON NORTHThis is a new seat, an extension of the existing but disappearing Romsey constituency. It covers the attractive Hampshire town and the Tory-leaning Southampton suburb of Bassett. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Liberal Democrats would have won it by the narrowest of majorities - 200 votes - over the Conservatives. So it can immediately be classed as a critical marginal which the Tories will hope to capture. The Liberal Democrat candidate is Sandra Gidley, a pharmacist, who won the Romsey seat at a by-election in 2000 and has held it ever since.ROSS, SKYE AND LOCHABERThis Highland seat, covering 4,600 square miles, is the largest UK parliamentary constituency in area. It is currently held by the Liberal Democrats and looks like staying that way. At the last election, the sitting MP, Charles Kennedy, who was the Liberal Democrat leader at the time, secured a huge majority of well over 14,000 over Labour. Topographically it is a typical Highland region with lochs, glens, islands and mountains. The industries include forestry, fishing, crafting, quarrying and several whisky distilleries. Tourism is also big business with much to see including rugged and romantic Glencoe, and Ben Nevis - the highest mountain in the UK.ROSSENDALE AND DARWENThis is a Labour-held seat but one which the Tories already have their eye on. It was won by Labour's Janet Anderson in 1992 with a majority of just 120 votes. Today, she is defending a majority of 3,600, so although she has increased the majority considerably, it is by no means a safe Labour stronghold. The area, which includes part of Blackburn, is made up of a number of small ex-mill towns in Lancashire. ROTHER VALLEY This is an ultra-safe Labour seat in South Yorkshire. At the last election the party had a majority of 14,000-plus over the Conservatives. Geographically it represents the south-eastern part of Rotherham borough and contains many small mining, rural and agricultural villages. Kevin Barron, a former electrician, has held the seat since 1983. He was for a period parliamentary private secretary to Neil Kinnock when he was Labour's leader.ROTHERHAMThis is another safe Labour South Yorkshire seat. Labour held it with a majority of more than 10,500 over the Conservatives in 2005. Rotherham remains an industrial town even though it has lost its steel and mining industries. The sitting MP Denis MacShane is a former president of the National Union of Journalists. He first entered Parliament in 1994 and has served as Minister for Europe.RUGBYThis is a "recreated" Warwickshire seat. Experts have calculated that if the seat had existed for the 2005 general election, then Labour would have won it by a margin of something over 2,000 votes – so it must be classed as a marginal which the Tories will hope to capture. The Labour candidate is Andy King who was MP for the disappearing seat of Rugby and Kenilworth from 1997 until 2005. It includes the public school, whose 19th century headmaster was the reformer Thomas Arnold. Earlier a pupil there, William Webb Ellis, picked up the ball and ran with it, thus inventing Rugby Football.  RUISLIP, NORTHWOOD AND PINNERThis is a new outer-London parliamentary seat. The boundary changes involved suggest it will be an even safer Tory haven than its predecessor, the disappearing Ruislip-Northwood constituency. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Conservatives would have romped home with a majority exceeding 13,000 over Labour. The changes add the affluent and leafy Harrow suburbs of Pinner and Hatch End to what was already a Conservative stronghold. The Tory candidate is likely to be Nick Hurd, who at present sits for the disappearing seat of Ruislip-Northwood. He is the son of Lord Hurd, the former Foreign Secretary, and the fourth generation in the male line to enter the House of Commons as a Conservative MP. RUNNYMEDE AND WEYBRIDGEThis ultra-safe Conservative seat was created in 1997, and has been held from then until now by Philip Hammond, shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury. At the last general election, Hammond registered a 12,300 majority over Labour. The constituency includes the affluent Surrey suburbs of Chertsey, Walton and Virginia Water – and the Tories are unlikely to be seriously challenged here. The Magna Carta pact between King John and the Barons was signed at Runnymede in 1216.  RUSHCLIFFEThis south Nottinghamshire seat is regarded as a safe Tory haven. It has been represented at Westminster since 1970 by Kenneth Clarke, the former Conservative Chancellor who is now shadow business secretary. At the last election, Mr Clarke triumphed with a majority of almost 13,000 over Labour. This was one of the few Tory-held seats in the area which did not succumb to Labour's landslide victory in 1997. This was put down to the popularity of the sitting MP. The main town in the constituency is West Bridgford, which is part of the Greater Nottingham urban area, and includes the Trent Bridge test cricket ground and Nottingham Forest FC.RUTHERGLEN AND HAMILTON WESTThis seat, created in 2005, is an impregnable Labour haven. At the last general election, the party romped home with a majority exceeding 16,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP Tom McAvoy was Member for the old seat of Rutherglen from 1987 until it was abolished.. He has served as a Government whip and is an active trade unionist. It covers the towns of Rutherglen and Cambuslang, just outside Glasgow and part of Hamilton, a former mining stronghold which, in 1967, saw the SNP’s Winnie Ewing win the party’s first Commons seat since the Second World War..  RUTLAND AND MELTONThis is a safe Tory county seat. At the last general election, the Conservatives retained it with a majority of just short of 13,000 over Labour. The constituency is one of the largest in England. It is predominantly rural, and might loosely be described as East Leicestershire. It comprises all of the county of Rutland with the market towns of Oakham and Uppingham, and the world famous man-made Rutland Water. The Melton part contains the seat's largest town - Melton Mowbray - famous for its pork pies and stilton cheese and includes the Vale of Belvoir with its famous castle. The sitting MP Alan Duncan is a former oil trader. He first represented this seat in 1992 and has held it ever since.SAFFRON WALDENThis is a largely rural constituency in North-West Essex covering almost 400 square miles. It is by far the largest constituency in Essex. There are also a host of small businesses, many of them high-tech. The main source of employment in the constituency is Stansted Airport. Since a by-election in 1977, this safe Conservative seat has been represented by Sir Alan Haselhurst, who has been a deputy speaker since 1997. At the last election, he secured a majority of just over 13,000 over the Liberal Democrats. From 1929 until 1965, this seat was represented by Rab Butler, who has been described as the best Prime Minister Britain never had.ST ALBANSThis is a critical marginal seat in Hertfordshire between the Tories and Labour. At the moment it is in Conservative hands, having been recaptured from Labour in 2005, but with a majority of below 1,400, so a fierce battle can be expected. It is a cathedral city which has become a London commuter town. St Albans is the oldest town in Hertfordshire, boasting over 2,000 years of history. It is on the site of Verulamium, one of Roman Britain's largest towns. The sitting MP Anne Main is a former English and drama teacher. She first entered Parliament in 2005. ST AUSTELL AND NEWQUAYThis is a new constituency which is expected to be held by Liberal Democrats. Experts have calculated that if it had been in existence in 2005, the Lib Dems would have sailed home with a majority approaching 6,000 over Conservatives, although those working on the ground believe it will be much less. This is an extra seat for Cornwall, giving it six. It stretches from coast to coast across the county, including the seaside town of Newquay, the china clay workings of St Austell and the port of Fowey – with its links to author Daphne Du Maurier. The area also covers the conservation Eden Project. ST HELENS NORTHThis is a rock-solid Labour seat on Merseyside which the party won with a majority of nearly 14,000 last time. What are described as "subtle" boundary changes are expected to reduce this majority marginally, but it will still remain impregnably Labour. The sitting MP David Watts entered Parliament in 1997. He was formerly leader of St Helens Metropolitan Borough Council. The area covers Haydock Park racecourse.ST HELENS SOUTH AND WHISTONThis is a new constituency replacing St Helens South. Experts have calculated that had it existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have secured a majority of near 11,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Northern Ireland Secretary Shaun Woodward, who has represented St Helens South since 2001, is a former Conservative MP who defected to Labour in 2000. Rainhill, in the constituency, is the site of the 1829 locomotive trials won by George Stephenson’s Rocket in a key milestone of the railway age. ST IVESThis Cornish constituency, famous for its coastline and moorlands, has experienced considerable boundary changes because of the shake-up of Parliamentary seats in Cornwall. But it is still expected to return a Liberal Democrat MP with a substantial majority. At the last election, the Lib Dems triumphed with a majority of more than 11,500 over the Conservatives. This seat includes the Isles of Scilly and takes in the most southerly - The Lizard - and most westerly - Land's End - points of the English mainland. Sitting MP Andrew George says he believes in gentle diplomacy to get his way rather than "beating a minister around the head with a rolled-up Hansard".SALFORD AND ECCLESThis is a new seat in Greater Manchester which is expected to produce a Labour majority of around 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats. This is regarded as a deprived area. There is a considerable Jewish population in some areas. The Conservatives, as of now, lie third in this constituency. The Labour candidate will be the energetic Hazel Blears, who quit the Cabinet and enraged many supporters by wearing a "rocking the boat" badge, which she displayed to TV cameras. The diminutive Blears, who entered Parliament in 1997, has been nicknamed The Iron Chipmunk.SALISBURYTories won here with a majority exceeding 11,000 in 2005. The margin is expected to be substantial although possibly slightly lower than this at the current election. The constituency comprises the city itself and over 100 villages and towns spread over 400 square miles of prosperous southern England, including Stonehenge. The economy is broadly based and unemployment stands at just a little over 1%. The largest single employer is the Ministry of Defence. The area contains the most famous "Rotten Borough" in history: Old Sarum which until 1832 returned two MPs on the votes of just a handful of electors. Among those elected in this way was William Pitt the Elder. Sitting Tory MP Robert Key, who entered Parliament in 1983, will not be fighting this election.SCARBOROUGH AND WHITBYThis Yorkshire seaside constituency has a large rural hinterland, with agriculture and tourism the principal industries. It is now a desperately close marginal between the Conservatives and Labour. The Tories hold it at present, but with a majority of only just over 1,000 votes, so Labour have it very much in their sights to recapture. The sitting MP is Robert Goodwill, an arable farmer who entered Parliament in 2005. He is a steam engine enthusiast who once brought an engine back from the former Czechoslovakia to restore it.SCUNTHORPEThis constituency is a safe Labour seat. At the last general election, the party triumphed with a majority of almost 9,000 over the Conservatives. This is regarded as an industrial seat with steel and food industries. The sitting MP Elliot Morley, who has represented the area at Westminster since 1987, will not be fighting this time.SEDGEFIELDThis is an ultra-safe Labour seat, which was held by Tony Blair from 1983 to 2007. His majority at the last general election of over 18,000 was reduced to just under 7,000 at the 2007 by-election on his departure from Westminster but is expected to be restored to nearer its 2005 level at this election. In 2005 there were no fewer than 15 candidates, more than any other constituency. This is an area of Durham, surrounding Darlington, renowned for its one-time mining industry and for its strong affiliation to the Labour Party. The sitting MP Philip Wilson is a former parliamentary researcher.SEFTON CENTRALThis is a new Merseyside constituency covering Crosby, Formby and Maghull. Even though some people label the new constituency as a Conservative-Liberal Democrat marginal, Labour are certainly in with a fighting chance. Indeed, experts have calculated that if this seat had existed at the 2005 election, Labour would have won with a majority of nearly 5,000. A striking feature at Crosby beach is Antony Gormley’s giant iron men sculptures.SELBY AND AINSTYThis is a new rural constituency in North Yorkshire. Experts have calculated that if it had existed at the time of the 2005 general election, the Conservatives would have won it over Labour with a majority of around only 2,000. This seat is the successor to the disappearing Selby constituency and also includes some Harrogate wards. Selby, thanks to a canal, was once a shipbuilding town despite being miles from the sea. It is now based largely on agriculture and tourism, while Tadcaster, also in the constituency, is famous for its breweries. The constituency also includes the sites of two of England's bloodiest battles, Towton – 1461 - and Marston Moor - 1644. It also includes the coal-fired Drax power station. SEVENOAKSThis Kent constituency is a rock-solid Conservative haven. At the last general election, the Tories romped home with a majority of almost 13,000 - over the Liberal Democrats. There have been considerable boundary changes to take account of population moves, but the Tory majority, by and large, is expected to hold up. The constituency is an affluent middle-class commuter-belt area. The sitting MP Michael Fallon has represented the constituency at Westminster since 1997. He was previously MP for Darlington. In the great storm of 1987 six of the seven oaks, planted in 1902 to mark Edward VII’s coronation, were blown down.SHEFFIELD BRIGHTSIDE AND HILLSBOROUGHThis is a new seat in South Yorkshire involving the abolition of the Sheffield Hillsborough constituency and the redrawing of the Sheffield Brightside constituency. It is bound to be a safe Labour seat, and the majority could be as high as 19,000 according to experts. The electoral wards in the new constituency are all entirely within the city of Sheffield. Labour’s David Blunkett, the former Home Secretary, at present sits for Sheffield Brightside. Hillsborough stadium was the scene of the 1989 disaster when 96 people died in a crush at the FA cup semi final between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool. SHEFFIELD CENTRALThis is a Labour-held inner-city seat with high unemployment. It ranges from the party’s Manor Castle stronghold to more middle class areas in Broomhill and Nether Edge. At the last general election, Labour registered a majority of some 7,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Boundary changes may help to reduce that majority, but the experts are still predicting a Labour victory here. The sitting MP Richard Caborn, a former Sports Minister, who has represented the constituency since 1983, is not contesting the seat this time. SHEFFIELD HALLAMThis seat covering the south-west portion of the city of Sheffield, was once a safe Conservative constituency, but no longer. It is now held by Nick Clegg, the Liberal Democrat leader, who secured it with a majority of 8,500-plus over the Conservatives. This is the only constituency in South Yorkshire not held by Labour. The constituency is believed to be the wealthiest in the north of England. The vast majority of the constituency is rural, spreading in the west to the Peak District National Park.SHEFFIELD HEELEYThis was originally a Conservative seat. It changed hands three times between 1966 and 1974, since when it has become a safe Labour seat, with the Liberal Democrats now in a distant second place. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority of nearly 11,500. Much of the industry along the valleys has given way to supermarkets and leisure complexes. The sitting MP Meg Munn has represented the seat at Westminster since 2001.SHEFFIELD SOUTH EASTThis is a new constituency, succeeding the Sheffield Attercliffe seat. Labour are the favourites to win this seat - and with ease. Experts believe their majority could be as high as 16,000. The Labour candidate will be Clive Betts, the current MP for Sheffield Attercliffe. He has represented the seat since 1992. The area was at one time the centre of the city’s famed steel and cutlery industries. In the 14th century Geoffrey Chaucer, in the Canterbury Tales, referred to knives being made in Sheffield. SHERWOODThis central Nottinghamshire constituency is an area of contrasts, including Ravenshead - home to some of Nottinghamshire's most affluent residents, smaller rural and ex-mining villages and the town of Hucknall, now a commuter town but with a long coalfield tradition. This is a traditional Labour seat, although it did fall into Conservative hands briefly in the 1980s largely because the Nottinghamshire miners drifted away from Labour during the pit strike. Paddy Tipping, who has represented the seat since 1992, is not fighting this time on account of ill-health. He retained the seat for Labour last time with a majority of more than 6,500.SHIPLEYThis is a critical marginal seat between Labour and the Conservatives. It was in Tory hands for 30 years, but since 1997 has veered between Labour and Conservative. At the moment, the Tories hold it by a majority of just 422 over Labour, so a tough battle can be expected. The area of Yorkshire is known for being the home of the Saltaire World Heritage Site. The village was built by Sir Titus Salt, mill owner and philanthropist in the 19th century. The current MP is Philip Davies, a controversial right-winger and devout Eurosceptic.SHREWSBURY AND ATCHAMThis constituency at the centre of Shropshire is now a vital marginal. Since 1997 it has been held by Labour, the Liberal Democrats and now, again, by the Conservatives. The Tories secured a majority over Labour of under 2,000 at the last election, so it will be a hard-fought contest. The sitting MP, Daniel Kawczynski, who entered Parliament in 2005 is the tallest Member at Westminster now and possibly, at 6ft 8.5ins, the tallest ever. In addition to Shrewsbury, the county town of Shropshire, the constituency also includes many villages in the surrounding countryside. It was the scene of a bloody battle in 1403 when Henry IV triumphed over Harry Hotspur who was killed. SHROPSHIRE NORTHThis rural constituency north of Shrewsbury on the borders with Wales is a Tory safe haven. At the last general election, the Conservatives triumphed over Labour with a majority of just over 11,000. This constituency, which has not been affected by boundary changes, includes the towns of Wem, Ellesmere, Oswestry, Whitchurch and Market Drayton. The sitting MP Owen Paterson, a millionaire and one of the country's leading exponents of leather technology, entered Parliament in 1997.SITTINGBOURNE AND SHEPPEYThis Kent seat is a critical Labour/Conservative marginal, at present in Labour's hands. But there is every likelihood that it will become a Conservative constituency after this election. Experts calculated that had it existed in its new form – with considerable boundary changes – at the time of the last general election, then the Tories would have squeaked home by the narrowest of margins, well under 50 votes. The constituency takes in the port of Sheerness plus the north Kent coast. The sitting MP Derek Wyatt is standing down this time. SKIPTON AND RIPONThis rural North Yorkshire seat which covers the whole of the district of Craven is regarded as one of the safest Tory seats in the country. At the last election, the Conservatives triumphed over the Liberal Democrats with a majority of 11,500-plus, and the Tories are expecting another equally healthy majority this time. This is one of the largest constituencies in Britain. It covers some 900 square miles and stretches across the Pennine dales of North Yorkshire, embracing a large part of the Dales National Park. The sitting Conservative MP David Curry is standing down at this election.SLEAFORD AND NORTH HYKEHAM This large rural Lincolnshire seat which stretches from Grantham to the edge of Lincoln is well-established Tory territory. At the last general election, the party secured victory with a majority of more than 12,500 over Labour. The sitting MP Douglas Hogg, who has represented the constituency since its creation in 1997 and before that sat for the old seat of Grantham from 1979, is not standing at this election.SLOUGHThis seat, once held by the Conservatives, now seems to be reasonably firmly in the hands of Labour which registered a majority of nearly 8,000 here at the last general election. This constituency comprises not only the industrial town of Slough but its dense suburbs. There is a large Asian community here. The sitting MP Fiona Mactaggart is believed to be among the richest Labour Members at Westminster. She was a teacher and said she wanted to be an MP to change the world "30 people at a time". SOLIHULLThis is a largely well-off, residential area, in the south-east of the West Midlands conurbation. The Conservatives had always viewed this leafy suburb west of Birmingham as a safe seat, having held it since it was established in 1945 until 2005. Yet, in that election it was captured by the Liberal Democrats, with a majority of just 279 votes. However, boundary changes should favour the Conservatives. The sitting MP is Lorely Burt, an economist, who began her career in the prison service. SOMERSET NORTHThis is a re-created West Country constituency, the successor seat to Woodspring which disappears. It seems likely to become a safe Conservative haven. Current MP for Woodspring, Dr Liam Fox, shadow defence secretary, was one of the unsuccessful candidates for the Conservative Party leadership when Mr Cameron was elected. The constituency, reaching up to the Bristol Channel, includes the resort of Clevedon and Portishead, site of the maritime radio coast station – a vital link for the Merchant Navy in the last century but now superseded by new technology.SOMERSET NORTH EASTThis is another new West Country seat, a successor to the disappearing constituency of Wansdyke. It is looking likely to be a critical marginal constituency between Labour and the Conservatives. Experts reckon that had it existed at the time of the last election, the Tories would have won, but with a majority of only just over 200 votes. Dan Norris, a former teacher and child protection officer has represented Wansdyke since 1997. The Tory candidate is Jacob Rees-Mogg, son of Lord Rees-Mogg, former editor of The Times. The constituency covers the towns of Midsomer Norton and Keynsham, on the outskirts of Bristol and home for more than 80 years of the Fry’s chocolate factory. It had been earmarked for closure this year by owners Cadbury, who have themselves been taken over by Kraft.SOMERTON AND FROMEThis agricultural seat covers the east of the district of Mendip and the north of the district of South Somerset. At one time it included part of the Somerset coalfield with Frome returning Labour MPs. The Liberal Democrats have held it since 1997, albeit very narrowly by three-figure majorities. The Conservatives, who lost by only 800 votes last time, will be targeting this constituency at this election. The sitting MP David Heath is a registered optician. The Tory candidate will be Annunziata Rees-Mogg, sister of Jacob who is fighting nearby Somerset North East.SOUTH HOLLAND AND THE DEEPINGSThis rural arable farming south Lincolnshire seat is a rock-solid Conservative haven. At the last election, the Tories swept home with a majority of approaching 16,000 – and the minor boundary changes this time should not affect that seriously. The sitting MP John Hayes, an Information Technology expert, first represented this seat in 1997 and has remained its MP, with successive majority increases, ever since.SOUTH RIBBLEThis is a Labour/Conservative marginal which is at present in Labour hands. The party won it in 2005 with a majority of something over 2,000 so it remains a target seat for the Tories. There have been considerable boundary changes since the last general election, but it remains a close call. This north-west constituency on the River Ribble includes the Leyland truck factory. The sitting Labour MP David Borrow entered Parliament in 1997. He is openly homosexual and in 2006 became the first MP to enter into a civil partnership.SOUTH SHIELDSThis is an ultra-safe Labour seat which the party won with a majority of 12,300-plus in 2005. It has been in Labour's hands since 1935, and the present incumbent is David Miliband, the Foreign Secretary. It is a former shipbuilding town on the mouth of the River Tyne. Mr Miliband, who entered Parliament in 2001, is a former policy analyst and was well-known in Whitehall circles before becoming an MP.SOUTHAMPTON ITCHENThis is traditionally a safe Labour constituency, although it has twice elected a Conservative MP in recent years. The present incumbent, Cabinet Minister John Denham retained the constituency in 2005 with a majority of more than 9,000 over the Conservatives. The constituency covers the city centre, the eastern port areas, the exclusive Ocean Village quarter and the inner city council estates including the impoverished Thornhill area. It is seen as the more working class of the two constituencies in the city.SOUTHAMPTON TESTThe seat covers the western part of Southampton. It includes the leafy northern suburbs and the western port areas as well as the council housing estates of the western fringes, plus the Ford Transit factory. It is seen as the marginally more affluent of the two constituencies in the city and has had more Tory tradition than Southampton Itchen. It is, however, in Labour hands at the moment. The party registered a majority of just over 7,000 over the Conservatives in 2005, so it is not regarded by the Tories as an impossible seat to win. The sitting MP Alan Whitehead is a renewable energy advocate and a former university lecturer.SOUTHEND WESTThis seaside constituency is safe Conservative territory. The party retained it at the last general election by a majority just short of 9,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The seat covers a small part of the west of Southend-on-Sea, and includes Leigh-on-Sea and Westcliff-on-Sea. Because four members of the Guinness family have held the seat - or its predecessor Southend - it is often dubbed "Guinness-on-Sea". The sitting MP David Amess formerly represented Basildon, but was elected to the Southend seat in 1997. He is strongly anti-abortionist.SOUTHPORTThis constituency, covering what has been described as a "faded" seaside resort, is now in Liberal Democrat hands, but has been a Liberal - Conservative marginal for much of its history, changing hands 10 times between the two parties since it was created in 1885.It is at present the only Merseyside seat not held by Labour. The Liberal Democrats retained it with a majority of under 4,000 over the Conservatives in 2005, so it is a seat very much in the sights of the Tories this time round. Its most notable MPs have been George Nathaniel Curzon, later Viceroy of India, and Edward Marshall-Hall one of the most notable trial lawyers of the early 20th century. The sitting MP John Pugh, who is a former religious studies teacher, entered Parliament in 2001.SPELTHORNEThis constituency has almost always been a Conservative stronghold. At the last election the party secured a majority of approaching 10,000 over Labour. The seat lies just south of Heathrow airport and north of the River Thames. It is a very built-up area and has far fewer open green spaces, private roads and woodlands than are commonly found further south in Surrey. However, the area is still very affluent. Most residents can afford to buy their own homes, council housing accounting for only 10% of the total, and the proportion of professionals and managerial workers is high. About 20% of all commercial or industrial property in Surrey is located here, including the headquarters of BP, Courage, the Ian Allan Group, McVitie's, Del Monte, Samsung Electronics and Shepperton Film Studios. The sitting MP David Wilshire is not contesting this election.STAFFORDThis part urban, part semi-rural seat is now a highly-charged marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. It is at present in Labour's hands, but they retained it with a majority of only just over 2,000 over the Conservatives in 2005. The boundary changes this time appear if anything, to be marginally in the Tories' favour, so it is a seat earmarked by them for victory this time. The sitting MP is David Kidney, a qualified solicitor. Kidney first won this formerly Conservative seat in 1997, when his unsuccessful Tory opponent was David Cameron, now the party leader.STAFFORDSHIRE MOORLANDSThis marginal constituency covers the largely rural areas of north-east Staffordshire, to the east of Stoke-on-Trent, including a large proportion of the Peak National Park. It is at present in Labour hands, but their majority at the last election was below 2,500 over the Conservatives - so a tough battle is promised. Some experts believe the seat now has a notional Conservative majority of about 1,000. The sitting MP Charlotte Atkins who entered Parliament in 1997 is a former trade union researcher and press officer.STAFFORDSHIRE SOUTHThis seat on the rural fringe of the West Midlands is a Conservative stronghold. At the last election, the Tories retained it with a majority of nearly 9,000 over Labour. The election in this constituency in 2005 was delayed because of the death of the Liberal Democrat candidate during the campaign. The sitting MP Sir Patrick Cormack entered Parliament in the biggest shock of the 1970 election when he ousted Nye Bevan’s widow Jennie Lee at Cannock. This former schoolmaster is not contesting this election.STALYBRIDGE AND HYDEThis constituency is a largely working-class residential area on the western fringes of Greater Manchester. It is a safe seat for Labour which has held it since 1945. At the last election, Labour retained the seat with a majority approaching 8,500 over the Conservatives. The current MP is James Purnell, a former Downing Street special advisor, who was first elected at the 2001 general election. He resigned his cabinet position as Work and Pensions Secretary in June 2009, over concerns about Gordon Brown's leadership.STEVENAGEThis is a Hertfordshire new town seat with volatile voting patterns. It was Tory between 1983 and 1997 until Labour easily gained it, but their winning margin in 2005 was unconvincing - 3,100 - and the Conservatives are certainly back in the hunt again. The town is home to a number of high-tech industries, including Astrium, BAe Systems, computer giant Fujitsu and GlaxoSmithKline pharmaceuticals. The sitting MP Barbara Follett, wife of the best-selling novelist Ken Follett, entered Parliament in 1997 but is not contesting this election.STIRLINGThis constituency stretches from Stirling, to Dunblane in the east, Tyndrum in the north and Drymen in the west. It is both rural and urban and includes many historic features such as Stirling Castle, Rob Roy's grave, Bannockburn battle site, Stirling Old Town Jail as well as part of the new National Park for Loch Lomond and the Trossachs. Labour wrested the seat from the Conservatives in 1997 and have held it ever since. In 2005, the Labour majority was some 4,700 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Anne McGuire, who entered Parliament in 1997 when she ousted the then Scottish Secretary Michael Forsyth, is a former teacher.STOCKPORTThis Greater Manchester constituency was captured by Labour from the Conservatives in 1992 and has been held by them ever since. At the last election, Labour's majority over the Tories was over 9,000, but there are signs this time that the result will be much tighter. The seat takes in the western part of Stockport with its engineering and foodstuffs industries. The sitting MP Ann Coffey is a former social worker.STOCKTON NORTHThis safe Labour constituency consists of the north-eastern part of Stockton-on-Tees and the nearby town of Billingham, and the surrounding villages. The seat is dominated by the former ICI chemical site at Billingham. Labour retained the seat with a majority just under 12,500 over the Conservatives in 2005. The sitting MP Frank Cook, who has represented the seat since 1983, is not contesting this election.STOCKTON SOUTHThis middle-class Tees-side seat south of Middlesbrough, consists of the south-western half of Stockton-on-Tees and the nearby town of Thornaby-on-Tees. It is more middle-class than neighbouring Stockton North. The former SDP-Liberal Alliance first held the seat very narrowly on its creation in 1983, before the Conservatives gained and held it for the next ten years. Labour's landslide got them in here in 1997 and they have retained it since. But the seat is still considered marginal and is a Conservative target at this election. Labour held it with a majority of just under 6,200 over the Conservatives in 2005. The sitting MP Dari Taylor is a former regional education officer.STOKE ON TRENT CENTRALThe working-class urban constituency dominated by skilled manual workers in the Potteries, has returned only Labour MPs since it was created in 1950. Labour secured a majority over the Liberal Democrats of nearly 10,000 in 2005, and the boundary changes since then probably do not favour either side particularly. The sitting MP Old Etonian Mark Fisher, has represented the seat since 1983. His father, Sir Nigel Fisher was a Tory MP. Mr Fisher’s Tory opponent at this election will be Norsheen Bhatti, a belly dancer.STOKE ON TRENT NORTHThis is an ultra-safe Labour seat crossing the city boundary to take in part of Newcastle-under-Lyme Borough. The party retained it in 2005 with a majority exceeding 10,000 over the Conservatives. Each of the three constituencies of Stoke-on-Trent contain two of the historic ‘six towns’ of the Potteries. Burslem and Tunstall are Stoke-on-Trent North's historic towns. The sitting MP Joan Walley, a former local government officer, has represented the seat since 1987. She is a fervent supporter of Port Vale - the major football club in her constituency.STOKE ON TRENT SOUTHThis is a safe Labour seat, like the other Stoke-on-Trent constituencies. It includes the city's most middle-class ward, Trentham, which is usually out-voted by neighbouring working class areas with a preponderance of skilled, manual Potteries' workers. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority exceeding 8,500 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Robert Flello, a former Labour Party regional organiser, entered Parliament in 2005.STONEThis safe Conservative rural Staffordshire seat, which includes the famous Alton Towers, is one of the largest, geographically, in England. At the last general election, the Tories secured a majority exceeding 9,000 over Labour. The sitting MP Bill Cash, one of the foremost Euro-sceptics at Westminster, has represented the seat since it was recreated in 1997. Before that he was MP for Stafford from 1984. He is a member of the famous Cash name-tag family.STOURBRIDGEThis West Midlands constituency, which covers the south-west of Dudley and is both industrial and rural, is a critical marginal. Labour hold it now, but with a majority of only 407 over the Conservatives in 2005. Labour's majority has dwindled markedly at every election since 1997. It therefore remains a high-priority seat for the Tories to capture this time. The sitting MP, Lynda Waltho, who entered Parliament in 2005, specialises in education and child care issues.STRANGFORDThis is an overwhelmingly Unionist seat in Northern Ireland. It has been fiercely contested by the Ulster Unionist Party and the Democratic Unionist Party. The DUP narrowly wrested it from the UUP in 2001, but in 2005, the DUP romped home with a majority of more than 13,000. Oddly, the town of Strangford is not in this constituency but in South Down. The constituency stretches from the shores of Strangford Lough to the suburbs of Belfast. The proposed boundary changes may favour the UUP at this election. The sitting MP Iris Robinson, wife of the DUP’s Peter Robinson, resigned from Parliament in January this year following the disclosure of her affair with a 19-year-old youth.STRATFORD ON AVONThis largely rural constituency in Warwickshire's Shakespeare country is a safe Tory haven. But under boundary changes, its size will be considerably reduced at this general election. In 2005, the Tories held the seat with a majority exceeding 12,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP barrister John Maples, who has represented the constituency since 1997, was formerly Member for West Lewisham. He is not standing at this election. This seat was held by John Profumo from 1950 until 1963 when he resigned from Parliament amid the famous sex scandal.STREATHAMThis is a long, thin constituency running down the west side of the London Borough of Lambeth. It was once an ultra-safe Tory seat but since 1980 it has swung against the Conservatives and changed into first a marginal Labour-held seat to a safe Labour seat. In 2001, and again in 2005, the Liberal Democrats pushed the Conservatives into third place. At the last election, Labour were victorious by almost 7,500 votes. There are minor boundary changes planned. The sitting MP Keith Hill is not standing at this election. His successor as Labour candidate is Chuka Umunna, an employment lawyer who, it has been said, could become Britain's Barack Obama. The London commuter area had a spa in Georgian times and there are still remains of one of the Streatham Wells.STRETFORD AND URMSTONThis Greater Manchester constituency is safe Labour territory. This constituency, on different boundaries, was once represented at Westminster by Winston Churchill, grandson of the wartime Prime Minister. In 2005, Labour held it with a majority of nearly 8,000 over the Conservatives. The seat lies to the south-west of central Manchester and includes Old Trafford. The sitting MP Beverley Hughes, a lecturer and trained probation officer, is not contesting this election. STROUDThis prosperous semi-rural and part industrialised seat by the M5 in Gloucestershire and south of Gloucester itself, is now a critical marginal. At the moment, it is in Labour's hands but with a majority, secured in 2005, of only 350 over the Conservatives. The Tories hope it will be in their hands after this general election. The sitting MP David Drew, a former teacher and university lecturer, entered Parliament in 1997. SUFFOLK CENTRAL AND IPSWICH NORTHThis is a relatively safe Conservative seat which the Tories retained with a majority of nearly 8,000 over Labour in 2005. It is mainly rural, covering the towns of Framlingham – with its castle and school – and Wickham Market. The Conservative MP for this seat since it was created in 1997 has been Sir Michael Lord, who has been a deputy Commons Speaker from that date. Before that he was MP for the former seat of Suffolk Central from 1983. Sir Michael is standing down at this election.SUFFOLK COASTALThis is a relatively safe Conservative seat which the Tories held by a majority of nearly 10,000 in 2005. This seafront constituency includes the container port of Felixstowe, the picturesque old town of Woodbridge and Sizewell nuclear plant. It stretches up to the resort of Southwold off which the naval Battle of Sole Bay was fought in 1672. The sitting MP John Gummer, a former Environment Secretary, has said he will not be contesting this general election. He has represented this seat from 1983.SUFFOLK SOUTHThis is another relatively safe Conservative seat, although the party's majorities are well down on the 17,000 registered in 1992. However, the Tories won reasonably comfortably in 2005 with a majority of just over 6,500 over the Liberal Democrats. The seat largely comprises rolling Suffolk countryside around Sudbury, the most populous town in the constituency. The sitting MP is Tim Yeo, who has represented the constituency since 1983, having previously unsuccessfully fought Bedwellty, which was Neil Kinnock's seat.SUFFOLK WESTThis rural Suffolk constituency includes Newmarket, regarded as the world's headquarters of horse-racing. It is another relatively safe Conservative seat in East Anglia. The Tories held it with a majority of around 9,000 over Labour in 2005. The seat in its present form has been represented since 1997 by the Conservative Richard Spring, previously MP for Bury St Edmunds. He has announced that he will not be contesting the seat this time.SUNDERLAND CENTRALThis new constituency will be much more marginal than its previous incarnations, bringing together virtually all the areas of traditional Conservative strength into one seat. At the most recent council elections, Conservatives carried five of Sunderland Central's nine wards, with Labour winning three and the Liberal Democrats one. Even so, the experts are predicting a Labour victory here. Sunderland Central takes in the majority of the former Sunderland North seat, and the most easterly part of the old Sunderland South. Both these have been held by Labour since the 1960s. Since 1992 Sunderland South has won the race for the first election night declaration. The city was a major shipbuilding centre but its last yards closed more than 20 years ago.SURREY EASTThis constituency has been a Tory stronghold for decades. The Tories romped home with a majority over Labour of almost 16,000 in 2005. The constituency comprises woody, hilly commuter villages by the Kent border. The sitting MP Peter Ainsworth, is a former political researcher and investment analyst. He has represented the seat since 1992. Before him Sir Geoffrey (now Lord) Howe, the former Conservative Chancellor and Foreign Secretary, was the MP here.SURREY HEATHThis constituency to the north-west of Surrey, with Camberley as its largest town, is another Conservative stronghold. It can be described as typical stockbroker belt country. At the last general election, the Tories sailed home with a majority over the Liberal Democrats of approaching 11,000. The sitting MP Michael Gove, who is expected to be Schools Secretary if the Tories win this election, was a journalist on The Times. He first entered Parliament at the last general election.SURREY SOUTH WESTThis constituency, which includes the towns of Farnham, Godalming and Haslemere, has been consistently held by the Conservatives although with considerably fluctuating majorities, brought about largely by boundary changes. Even so, the majority of mere 861 in 2001 came as a shock to the Tories. The majority climbed to some 5,700 at the last election, but the Liberal Democrats have their eye on this seat. This is seen as an affluent rural/residential constituency, with some industry and a high proportion of London commuters. The sitting MP is Jeremy Hunt, a millionaire, who first entered Parliament in 2005.SUSSEX MIDThis constituency includes the historic market town of East Grinstead, Burgess Hill, Haywards Heath with its fast commuter links to London and the attractive village of Lindfield. It is regarded as safe Conservative territory, although the Liberal Democrats believe they could capture it this time. At the last election the Tories swept home with a majority of just under 6,000 with the Liberal Democrats in hot pursuit. The current MP Nicholas Soames, a high-profile Tory, is a grandson of Sir Winston Churchill.SUTTON AND CHEAMThis constituency, now in the hands of the Liberal Democrats has become a crucial marginal which the Conservatives will be hoping to win at this election. In 2005, the Lib Dems, who have held the seat since 1997, retained it with a majority of under 3,000 over the Conservatives. The seat largely comprises middle-class suburbia on the south-west outskirts of London. It covers the site of Henry VIII’s Nonsuch Palace later dismantled by Charles II’s mistress the Duchess of Cleveland. The sitting MP Paul Burstow is the son of a Savile Row tailor. He was named in 2005 as London's hardest-working MP.SUTTON COLDFIELDThis constituency covers the northern part of Birmingham in the West Midlands, comprising largely middle-class suburbia brought into the city in 1973. It is one of the Conservative Party's safest seats in Britain, the party having held it continuously since its formation in 1945. At the last general election, the Tories sailed home with a majority of some 12,300 over Labour. The current MP is Tory front-bencher Andrew Mitchell, a former merchant banker and a member of the family behind the famous El Vino's bar in Fleet Street.SWANSEA EASTThis is an ultra-safe urban seat in South Wales. At the last election, Labour stormed home with a majority of more than 11,200 over the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives and Plaid Cymru barely in sight. The seat comprises docks and factories to the east and north of Wales's second city. The sitting MP Sian James, who entered Parliament in 2005, was encouraged to undertake a political career after her active involvement in the 1984 miners' strike. She is a former director of Welsh Women's Aid.SWANSEA WESTThis is another safe Labour seat, although the party's majority dropped to below 4,300 at the last election from 9,500 in 2001. The seat comprises middle-class Swansea around the university and redeveloped docks. Alan Williams has represented the seat for the Labour Party since the 1964 general election; since 2005 he has been the 'Father of the House' - the senior MP with the longest unbroken service. Williams will not contest the next general election, thus ending a parliamentary career of over 40 yearsSWINDON NORTHThis seat, now in Labour's hands, has become a Labour/Conservative marginal. Labour won it with a majority of 2,571 in 2005, compared with a majority of over 8,000 in the previous general election, so the Tories are looking for victory this time. Swindon is seen as something of a boom town with its Honda factory. The current MP Michael Wills, a former diplomat, who entered Parliament in 1997, is not contesting this election. SWINDON SOUTHThis is a highly marginal seat, at present in Labour hands. But the party's majority at the last election was a mere 1,300 so this constituency is high on the list of Tory "hopefuls". Sitting MP Anne Snelgrove, a former teacher, entered Parliament in 2005. The constituency covers the southern part of this boom town, plus rural village wards and what are described as "posh" residential areas. The tiny 1830s market town was roused from its slumbers by the roar of the Great Western Railway which dominated it for more than a century. The boundary bisects what was once the GWR’s empire with the busy commuter station in this constituency and the former locomotive works site in Swindon North. TAMWORTHThis Staffordshire constituency is highly marginal, at present held by Labour. But the party secured a majority of only 2,500 at the last general election, so the Conservatives will be fighting hard to gain control this time. This seat, which lies to the north-east of Birmingham, has many commuters to that city. The current MP Brian Jenkins, a former engineer, entered Parliament at a by-election in 1996. Sir Robert Peel, who became Prime Minister, represented this constituency from 1830 onwards.TATTONThis is almost certainly the most affluent constituency in the North of England. It is also the third wealthiest in the United Kingdom, after Kensington and Chelsea and Cities of London and Westminster. It includes the Cheshire towns of Wilmslow and Knutsford. It is now a safe Tory haven. The current MP George Osborne, the shadow Chancellor, secured a majority of 11,700 at the last general election. In 1997, the seat was captured – for a single Parliament only – by the anti-sleaze Independent Martin Bell, in the wake of the involvement of Tory Neil Hamilton in the cash-for-questions affair.TAUNTON DEANEAlthough the name of Taunton constituency has changed there are only small boundary alterations. This Somerset seat is a critical marginal between the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives. It is based on the county town of Taunton but extends to include Wellington, many small villages and parts of Exmoor. The Liberal Democrats’ Jeremy Browne won last time but by a majority of just 573 over the Tories, so a bitter fight can be expected. Robert Blake, the 17th century admiral, originally rose to fame for his defence of the town for Parliament in the civil war. TELFORDTelford was created in 1997 from the core of the old Wrekin constituency and has been held by the Labour Party since its creation. Despite its reputation, not all of Telford is solidly working class and there is a sizeable Tory vote in middle class areas like Priorslee. It is made up of several old industrial towns to the north of the River Severn and on the eastern flanks of The Wrekin, including Madeley, Dawley and the small townships in the Ironbridge Gorge and numerous new town developments. But it is by no means an ultra-safe Labour seat. In 2005, the party secured a majority of under 5,500 over the Conservatives, so the Tories could be in with a real chance. The sitting MP is David Wright, a former local government officer. He entered Parliament in 2001.TEWKESBURYThis historic English country town nestles among the Malvern Hills and the Cotswolds. It is the site of a bloody triumph in 1471 by Edward IV against Lancastrians in the Wars of the Roses. It is a safe Conservative seat and has been in their hands since the constituency was re-created in 1997 after nearly 80 years. At the last general election, the Tories registered a majority of approaching 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats. The sitting MP Laurence Robertson is a former public relations consultant. He has run six marathons, including the New York City event.THANET NORTHNorth Thanet, a Kent coastal seat, which includes Margate, Herne Bay and Westgate-on-Sea, has been held consistently by the Conservative Party, with Roger Gale representing the constituency since its creation in 1983. At the last general election, he secured a majority of 7,600 over Labour. This seat is subject to major boundary changes which, if anything, slightly favour Labour on paper. Mr Gale is a former freelance broadcaster. His unsuccessful Labour opponent in this seat in 1983 was Cherie Blair, wife of the former Prime Minister Tony Blair.THANET SOUTHThis Kent coastal seat, which includes Sandwich, Broadstairs and Ramsgate, is now a critical marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. It is at present in Labour's hands, but they secured the seat with a majority of only 664 at the last general election, so a tough battle is in the offing. Experts suggest boundary changes might have shifted the seat to Tories if they had been in force in 2005. The sitting Labour MP is Stephen Ladyman, a former Transport Minister with a passion for fast cars. Before 1997, the MP for this seat was Tory Jonathan Aitken, who went to prison for perjury.THIRSK AND MALTONThis is a new constituency in North Yorkshire made up chiefly from the effectively disappearing constituencies of the Vale of York and Ryedale. It is expected to be a rock-solid Conservative seat. Tory Anne McIntosh is the sitting Member for Vale of York constituency. Thirsk and Malton is a huge rural seat covering part of the North Yorkshire moors - the author James Herriot lived and practised as a vet in Thirsk - and then following the Yorkshire Wolds east to the coastal town of Filey. The constituency has a high rate of owner-occupiers and low unemployment. The economy is largely based on tourism and agriculture, though many residents commute into York.THORNBURY AND YATEThis south-west seat is the successor to the constituency of Northavon which is abolished. It stretches from the River Severn and the towns of Thornbury and Alveston – including dormitory areas for Bristol – to the edge of the Cotswolds. All the signs are that it will become a Liberal Democrat stronghold, possibly with majorities into five figures. The current sitting Lib Dem MP for Northavon is Steve Webb. He was Professor of Social Policy at the University of Bath. THURROCKThis urban, working-class Essex seat, on the shores of the River Thames, is relatively safe Labour territory, although it briefly fell into Tory hands in 1987. In 2005, Labour triumphed with a majority of 6,375 over the Conservatives. The current MP, Andrew Mackinlay, an energetic and independently-minded campaigner, who has represented the seat since 1992, will not be contesting this election. The constituency includes the port of Tilbury which was where Elizabeth I inspired her troops with a rousing speech as the Spanish Armada approached in 1588. TIVERTON AND HONITONThis redrawn Devon constituency is expected to retain the strong Conservative majority enjoyed by the constituency of the same name in 2005. At that election, the Tories romped home with a majority just exceeding 11,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Although predominantly rural, this constituency has textile, engineering, food processing and animal food industries. Honiton lace is still manufactured and is used on the robes of the Speaker of the House of Commons. The current MP is Angela Browning, a former sales and training manager and a specialist in corporate communication training. She has represented this seat since 1992.TONBRIDGE AND MALLINGThis Garden of England seat, affected by the Channel Tunnel, is typical Tory territory. It is characterised by a large commuter population, but there are significant light engineering, farming and service industry sectors. The River Medway crosses the constituency, which is also famous for Hever Castle, oast houses and the Wealden forests. In 2005, the Tories held this seat over Labour with a majority exceeding 13,300. Although there are major boundary changes to this constituency, the Conservative majority is expected to hold up. The sitting MP is John Stanley, who was first elected in February, 1974. He was parliamentary private secretary to Margaret Thatcher when she was Leader of the Opposition.TOOTINGThis is a traditional working-class area in south London, with a significant ethnic minority community. But despite that, the Conservatives regard this constituency – in their flagship Wandsworth Borough - as what has been described as "a viable target". The sitting Labour MP, Sadiq Khan, held the seat in 2005 with a majority approaching 5,400 over the Conservatives. Mr Khan, a solicitor specialising in human rights issues, first entered Parliament in 2005.TORBAYThis south-west constituency which includes the seaside resort of Torquay and a significant number of pensioners, is currently in Liberal Democrat hands. But it remains high on the Conservative target list. The Liberal Democrats snatched it from the Conservatives in 1997 by a majority of just 12 votes. Since then, the Lib Dem majority has risen considerably and in 2005 stood at over 2,000. Even so, the Conservative are aiming to recapture it. The sitting MP Adrian Sanders is a rock music fan and occasionally presents a rock show on local radio.TORFAENThis is a Labour Party stronghold. The area covers the new town of Cwmbran, Pontypool and its surrounding districts east of the Welsh valleys, and stretches as far north as Blaenavon. In 2005, Labour retained the seat with a majority exceeding 14,700 over the Conservatives. The current MP, Paul Murphy, has represented this seat since 1987. He has twice served as Secretary of State for Wales and before that was Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.TOTNESThis constituency, now a critical marginal between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats, occupies a large chunk of South Devon, including 51 miles of coastline. It includes the southern part of the Dartmoor National Park and 31 Conservation Areas, and is, according to the House of Commons Library, one of the most attractive and scenic areas in England and one of the most beautiful constituencies. The sitting MP barrister Anthony Steen, who is not contesting this election, retained the seat for the Tories in 2005 with a majority of only 1,947. The new Conservative candidate is Dr Sarah Wollaston, who was the first candidate in this country to be selected under an open primary process. The Liberal Democrat candidate is Julian Brazil, a local councillor.TOTTENHAMThis is an ultra-safe Labour seat in North London. At the last general election, the party swept home with a majority exceeding 13,000 over the Liberal Democrats. This is the third most multi-racial constituency in Britain, with a particularly large Cypriot community. The sitting MP David Lammy has represented the seat since 2000 through a by-election caused by the death of his predecessor Bernie Grant. Mr Lammy, when asked on the BBC TV programme Mastermind who was the successor to Henry VIII replied Henry VII.TRURO AND FALMOUTHThis new constituency, like its disappearing predecessor, Truro and St Austell, is expected to become a Liberal Democrat seat this time, but the majority is not likely to be substantial. So the Tories have it very much in their sights. This new boundary arrangement gives Cornwall an extra parliamentary constituency. The Liberal Democrat candidate Terrye Teverson, a local councillor, runs a printing company. Her husband Lord Teverson is a Member of the Lords. The constituency includes the cathedral city of Truro and the port of Falmouth, a start and finish point for long distance sailing events.TUNBRIDGE WELLSThis is an impregnable Conservative stronghold in Kent, which returned a majority of almost 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats in 2005. Boundary changes are unlikely to shake the Tory majority. There is a degree of light engineering in this constituency and a considerable commuter population. An outraged letter by a local resident to a London newspaper added the phrase “disgusted of Tunbridge Wells” to the language. It is an historic spa town and includes the Pantiles walkway. The sitting MP Greg Clark, who was first elected in 2005, is a former chief adviser on commercial policy to the BBC. He is shadow energy secretary.TWICKENHAMThis south west London Thames-side seat was a safe Conservative haven for many years – that is until 1997 when the Liberal Democrats captured it from them. It now seems to be a Lib Dem stronghold, with the party winning in 2005 with a majority of almost 10,000 over the Conservatives. The constituency includes Hampton Court Palace and Bushy Park, and the Rugby Football Union's ground, Twickenham Stadium. The sitting MP Vince Cable, who is the Lib Dem economics spokesman, has become at least as prominent a political figure as the party's leader, Nick Clegg.TYNEMOUTHThis Tyneside seat has a chequered history. It has, in the past, been Conservative held, but is now in Labour hands – although at the last election, the Tories were creeping up to transform it into a possible marginal. Labour's majority in 2005 was 4,143, which is by no means a secure majority. Boundary modifications are thought to slightly favour Labour. In addition to Tynemouth itself, the constituency covers parts of North Shields, Whitley Bay and the whole of Cullercoats. There is heavy industry here as well as smart seaside towns. The sitting Labour MP is Alan Campbell, a former teacher and junior Home Office minister. He entered Parliament in 1997. TYNESIDE NORTHThis is a rock-solid Labour seat, and the boundary changes, which bring the town of Wallsend into the constituency, should not make much adverse impact on the Labour majority. At the last election, Labour romped home with a majority exceeding 15,000 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP is Stephen Byers, the former Transport Secretary. Mr Byers, who is not contesting the election this time, has represented this seat since its creation in 1997. Before that he was MP for the former constituency of Wallsend. This predominantly working-class constituency includes many former pit villages. Rail pioneer George Stephenson lived at Killingworth where he built his first locomotive in 1814. TYRONE WESTThis is an overwhelmingly nationalist seat in Northern Ireland. This was a seat in which the Ulster Unionists and the Democratic Unionists have in the past – 2001 - agreed not to fight against each other, in a bid – which proved unsuccessful – to keep Sinn Fein out. In the event, at the last election, Sinn Fein retained the seat with a 5,000 majority over an independent candidate. This is a rural seat centred on Omagh. The sitting MP Pat Doherty, a site engineer, in accordance with Sinn Fein practice, has not taken his seat in the Commons.ULSTER MIDMid Ulster, to the north-west of Northern Ireland, now in the hands of Sinn Fein, has the reputation of the highest voter turn-out of any seat in the United Kingdom. The turn-out of 91.5% at the by-election in 1969 which brought Bernadette Devlin into Parliament was a record for any by-election in the UK. Over the past 40 years, this constituency has been variously held by Sinn Fein, Vanguard, the Democratic Unionists and United Ulster Unionists. In 2005, Sinn Fein registered a majority of almost 11,000 over the Democratic Unionists. The present incumbent Martin McGuinness, in accordance with Sinn Fein practice, has not taken his seat at Westminster.UPPER BANNThis Northern Ireland seat has been a fierce battleground between the Ulster Unionists and the Democratic Unionists, with the DUP now holding the upper hand. In 2005, the DUP secured a majority of more than 5,000 over the Ulster Unionists, a result which ousted the, then, Ulster Unionist leader David, now Lord, Trimble from Westminster. This is a rural seat including the towns of Portadown and Craigavon. The sitting MP David Simpson, who first won the seat in 2005, is the senior partner in a meat processing business.UXBRIDGE AND RUISLIP SOUTHThis is a new constituency to the far west of Greater London and is the successor to the existing Uxbridge seat. It is expected to return a Conservative MP with a substantial majority. The constituency is described as middle-of-the-road suburbia. The present Conservative incumbent of the disappearing Uxbridge seat is John Randall, who manages a family department store in Uxbridge. He first entered Parliament through a by-election in 1997, almost immediately after the general election of that year.VALE OF CLWYDThis seat in North Wales is in Labour hands, but the 2005 majority of 4.700 over the Conservatives means it could easily swing to the Tories this time. The constituency includes the towns of Rhyl, Prestatyn, Denbigh and St. Asaph, which, despite its size, qualifies to be called a city because it has a cathedral - the smallest in Britain. The sitting Labour MP Chris Ruane is a former deputy head teacher. He entered Parliament in 1997.VALE OF GLAMORGANThis is a marginal seat to the west of Cardiff, containing the Labour-voting port of Barry, and Cardiff airport, surrounded by Conservative villages and small towns. At the moment it is held by Labour, but with a majority of under 2,000 over the Conservatives, so a bitter battle can be expected. The boundary changes might very marginally favour the Conservatives. The sitting MP John Smith, a former university tutor, won the seat at a by-election in 1989, lost it in 1992 by the narrowest of margins - 19 votes - but regained it in 1997. He is not contesting this election.VAUXHALLThis inner-London area, stretching from Waterloo to Clapham Common, is a Labour stronghold and has been traditionally left wing. However, the present incumbent, Kate Hoey, a former Sports Minister, is very much to the right of the Labour Party. At the last election she secured a majority of almost 10,000 over the Liberal Democrats. She has represented the constituency since a 1989 by-election. Included within its boundaries are Lambeth Palace, the Archbishop of Canterbury’s London headquarters, and the Oval test cricket ground. WAKEFIELDThe city part of this Yorkshire seat has a high density of council housing. Combined with a history of coal-mining, this has led the seat to be continuously Labour. The rural part of the seat covers several villages including Netherton - often mentioned during the 1984-5 miners' strike, as it contained two pits, one of which was threatened with accelerated closure. The National Coal Mining Museum for England is situated within the seat; it was formerly known as Caphouse Colliery before its 1985 closure. Labour secured a majority of 5,154 over the Conservatives in 2005. Boundary changes could be marginally favourable to Labour this time. The sitting MP Mary Creagh entered Parliament in 2005. Her campaign to promote healthy food for school meals was accepted by the Government and is now the law.WALLASEYThis was a Conservative seat until 1992, but increasing unemployment in the area saw the Conservative vote decline throughout the 1980s, with Labour's Angela Eagle winning the constituency in 1992. Labour have held it comfortably since then. In 2005, she secured a majority exceeding 9,000 over the Conservatives. This is an area of outer Wirral suburbs straddling the River Mersey, but it is in economic decline. It includes the resort of New Brighton. Ms Eagle, who has held various junior ministerial jobs, is a former trade union official.WALSALL NORTHThis constituency, on the outer edge of the West Midlands, is a Labour haven. In 2005, Labour registered a majority of 6,640 over the Conservatives. The constituency also covers the towns of Bloxwich and Willenhall. The sitting MP, veteran David Winnick has represented the constituency since 1979. In the 1970s, the seat was represented by John Stonehouse, the former Postmaster General, who faked his own death and was later imprisoned for fraud. Tories took the seat in the subsequent by-election – the only time they have done so since the second world war.WALSALL SOUTHThis is another Labour-safe West Midlands constituency. It is largely residential seat north of Birmingham, with a substantial Asian community. Labour registered a majority of almost 8,000 over the Conservatives at the last general election. The sitting MP is Bruce George, a former university lecturer, who specialises in defence issues. He first became MP for Walsall South in February, 1974 and has been re-elected at every general election since. He has represented this constituency longer than any of his predecessors.WALTHAMSTOWThis working-class north-east London suburb, with a mix of ethnic minorities is regarded as a safe Labour seat, although it has in the not too distant past fallen into Conservative hands. The constituency boasts the longest street market in western Europe. At the last election Labour's Neil Gerrard secured a majority of almost 8,000 over the Liberal Democrats. Mr Gerrard, who has represented the seat since 1992, is not contesting this election. Clement Attlee, the post-war Labour Prime Minister, sat for the former constituency of Walthamstow West.WANSBECKThis is a safe Labour seat in Northumberland, centred on Morpeth. It contains former mining towns and villages including Bedlington and Ashington - birthplace of England’s 1966 World Cup-winning hero brothers Bobby and Jack Charlton. The Liberal Democrats, rather than the Conservatives, are the main challengers here. At the last election, Labour's majority over the Lib Dems exceeded 10,500. The current MP Denis Murphy, a former miner, was the only individual in the 1997 intake of MPs to have the formal backing of the National Union of Mineworkers. This seat was once occupied by Alfred, later Lord, Robens, who became boss of the National Coal Board. WANTAGEThis is a rural Oxfordshire constituency covering most of the Vale of White Horse. It contains about 400 working farms. It is a safely Conservative seat, although the previous incumbent, Robert Jackson defected to Labour during the 2001 Parliament. At the last general election, the Tories secured a majority of 8,000-plus over the Liberal Democrats. The largest town is Didcot which grew around the Great Western Railway when Brunel built its main line between London and Bristol. Wantage is famous as the birthplace of King Alfred the Great. The present MP Ed Vaizey is shadow arts minister.WARLEYThis constituency on the edge of Birmingham, which includes Smethwick, is a safe Labour haven. At the last election, Labour triumphed with a majority of 10,000-plus over the Conservatives. This constituency was formed in 1997 and is basically an extension of the old Warley East constituency. Both Warley East and the also defunct Warley West had been Labour held since they were created in 1974. The sitting MP for Warley, John Spellar is the former member for Warley West. Mr Spellar, a former trade union officer, has been described as "a mucho macho man".WARRINGTON NORTHThis is a safe Labour seat, an inner-city industrial area, with its southern boundary being the River Mersey. It has been held by Labour ever since it was created in 1983. At the last general election, Labour registered a majority of more than 12,000 over the Conservatives. The present incumbent is left-winger Helen Jones, a solicitor. She has represented the seat since 1997. WARRINGTON SOUTHThis constituency is a marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. It lies on the Manchester Ship Canal between Liverpool and Manchester. It has been seen as a bellwether seat, often reflecting in its choice of MPs the fate of the major parties nationally. At present it is in Labour hands, with a majority of 3,515 over the Tories. The sitting MP Helen Southworth, who was first elected to Parliament in 1997, will not be contesting this election.WARWICK AND LEAMINGTONThis was a traditionally Conservative seat for many years, from 1910 until in 1997 Labour captured it. At the last election, Labour retained it but with a majority of only 266 over the Conservatives. However, boundary changes look to favour Labour so the Tories will have a harder job than appears on paper to recapture it. Both Warwick and Leamington are relatively prosperous, although there are pockets of deprivation in Leamington. Warwick is a popular tourist destination, while Leamington's economy is more industrial. Leamington is also more ethnically diverse – some 5% of the constituency's population is Asian - and is home to many University of Warwick students. The sitting MP James Plaskitt is a former university lecturer and business analyst. This seat was held for 34 years by Anthony Eden, the former Tory Prime Minister.WARWICKSHIRE NORTHThis constituency has a history of coal-mining as well as some pleasant rural commuter villages. It is a mixed urban seat which curls around the east of Birmingham. It was Conservative-held when first created in 1983, but switched to Labour in 1992 and has been comfortably in Labour hands ever since. At the last general election, Labour registered a majority of 7,500-plus over the Conservatives. Despite the scale of this majority, this is one of the seats that the Tories have particularly targeted this time. The current MP is Mike O'Brien, a lawyer, who has held various ministerial posts, including that of Solicitor General. WASHINGTON AND SUNDERLAND WESTThis is a new seat in the north-east of England which will almost certainly be a safe Labour haven. It is ranked by experts as Labour's seventh safest seat. They have calculated that had it existed at the 2005 general election. Labour would have romped home with a 17,000-plus majority over the Liberal Democrats, with the Conservatives narrowly in third place. The Labour MP for the current Gateshead East and Washington West constituency is Sharon Hodgson, a former administrator and book-keeper with Northern Rock.WATFORDThis Labour-held Hertfordshire seat is now a three-way marginal. Labour retained it at the last election with a majority of only 1,148 over the Liberal Democrats with the Conservatives only a few hundred votes behind the Lib Dems. The Lib Dem advance at that election, took many votes from Labour. This constituency, to the north-west of London, contains much light industry. The sitting MP is Claire Ward who in 1997 became the first female MP for Watford and, at 24, the youngest Labour woman MP ever. WAVENEYThe seat, including the most easterly point in Britain, is based on the busy coastal town of Lowestoft, which today is generally Labour-voting, with the smaller inland rural villages supporting the Tories. It has been Labour since their landslide win in 1997, but was Tory for generations previously, and was held for many years by the high profile Conservative cabinet minister James Prior, a famous 'wet' in the early years of Margaret Thatcher's government. The Labour majority in 2005 was bordering on 6,000 over the Tories, but the Conservatives are making a big effort to regain it this time. The sitting MP is Bob Blizzard, a former teacher.WEALDENThis is an ultra-safe Tory constituency in Sussex. Half its population lives in the area’s four main towns: Crowborough, Hailsham, Heathfield and Uckfield. The rest of the seat is predominantly rural and has many small towns, villages and hamlets. The Wealden landscape ranges from the Ashdown Forest in the north to the South Downs and the coast to the south. In 2005, the Tory majority was close on 16,000. The sitting MP Charles Hendry formerly sat for High Peak. He lost the seat in 1997 but was elected for Wealden in 2001.WEAVER VALEThe constituency covers the northern part of the Cheshire West and Chester unitary authority in Cheshire, including the towns of Northwich and Frodsham. It includes the western salt-mining part of Cheshire centred on Northwich. Labour held this seat with a majority of 6,800 over the Conservatives in 2005. The sitting MP Mike Hall is a former teacher and laboratory assistant. He first entered Parliament in 1992 as MP for Warrington South. Despite the scale of the Labour majority, the Tories claim increasing support in this area and are making a special effort to win it.WELLINGBOROUGHThis is very much a Labour-Conservative marginal seat with a mixed economy in Northamptonshire. The constituency covers the town of that name and Rushden in East Northamptonshire District. It is held at the moment by the Tories but their majority over Labour is below 700. The sitting Tory MP Peter Bone, who wrested the seat from Labour in 2005, is among the ten most active MPs at Westminster in terms of questions asked and other contributions. WELLSThis is a Tory-held seat in Somerset but the Conservative majority in 2005 was only just over 3,000 with the Liberal Democrats snapping at their heels. The sitting MP Old Etonian David Heathcoat-Amory, a chartered accountant, was first elected to this seat in 1983 and has held it ever since. The constituency also includes Shepton Mallet, Burnham-on-Sea, the festival town of Glastonbury and Street, headquarters of Clarks shoes. WELWYN HATFIELDThis Hertfordshire seat is in the hands of the Conservatives, but it is by no means a safe haven for them. The Tories wrested it from Labour in 2005 with a majority of under 6,000 and Labour are pulling out all the stops to regain it this time. The constituency comprises the twin new towns with much light industry. Hatfield House has been the home of the Cecil family of the Marquess of Salisbury for 400 years. In its grounds in 1558 Elizabeth I was told by messengers that she had become Queen. The constituency’s sitting MP is Grant Shapps, the shadow housing minister.WENTWORTH AND DEARNEThis is a new South Yorkshire constituency which shows all the signs of becoming an ultra-safe Labour haven. Experts have calculated that if this seat had existed at the 2005 general election, Labour would have sailed home with a majority of 17,500-plus over the Liberal Democrats. John Healey is the present MP for Wentworth and a Housing Minister. The new seat, in traditional Yorkshire coalfield territory, now takes in parts of Barnsley. WEST BROMWICH EASTThis West Midlands seat has one of the worst unemployment rates in the country. It is a rock-solid Labour seat. At the last general election, Labour sailed home with a majority of more than 11,500 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Tom Watson, who entered Parliament in 2001, has served as a whip and a junior Defence Minister. He has twice resigned from ministerial posts. Before arriving at Westminster he was a trade union advisor.WEST BROMWICH WESTThis is another safe Labour seat at the heart of the Black Country. It is mainly urban with old industrial communities and many manual workers. At the last general election, the party secured a majority of nearly 11,000 over the Conservatives. There is an active British National Party presence in this constituency. In 2005 the BNP came fourth here but polled nearly 10% of the votes cast. The sitting MP is Adrian Bailey, a former teacher and librarian, who first entered Parliament in 2000. This seat was held from 1974 to 2000 by Betty Boothroyd, the first woman Commons Speaker.WEST HAMThis is a safe Labour seat in London's East End. At the last general election, Labour cruised home with a majority of 9,800 over the Respect party which had hoped to benefit from the storm over the Iraq War. This constituency has been one of the fastest-growing in recent years and has more voters than any seat other than the Isle of Wight. Over one-quarter of the population are Afro-Caribbean while there is also a significant Asian population, many of whom are Muslims. The sitting MP Lyn Brown entered Parliament in 2005. She has served as a Government whip. WESTMINSTER NORTHThis is a recreated seat for this general election. It comprises parts of Cities of London and Westminster and Regent's Park and Kensington North constituencies. It is expected to be marginal between Labour and the Conservatives. It has a mixed composition of deprived and affluent areas. Experts have calculated that if this constituency existed at the last election, Labour would have won the seat with a majority of about 2,100 over the Conservatives. So it is very much up for grabs. Labour’s Karen Buck is present MP for Regent's Park and Kensington North.WESTMORLAND AND LONSDALEThis is a highly marginal seat covering South Lakeland and including the towns of Kendal, Windermere and Kirkby Lonsdale. It contains many agricultural areas and enjoys a big tourist industry. At the last general election, the Liberal Democrats wrested it from the Conservatives, but with a majority of under 300. And although the constituency has been modified to take account of population shifts since then, the Liberal Democrats are still on course, on paper at least, to win it, but once more by a very narrow margin only. So a tough battle can be expected. This seat is high on the Tories' target list. Sitting Liberal Democrat MP is Tim Farron, a former higher education manager.WESTON-SUPER-MAREThis is a high-marginal Somerset seaside constituency south of Bristol between the Conservatives and the Liberal Democrats. At the last election, the Tories wrested it back from the Lib Dems, but with a majority of only just over 2,000, so another bitter battle can be expected this time. The sitting Tory MP John Penrose is a schools' book publisher.WIGANThis industrial seat in the north-west of England is a safe Labour haven. At the last election, the party secured a majority of approaching 12,000 over the Conservatives. The current MP Neil Turner, a former quantity surveyor, has announced that he will be standing down at this election. He first held the seat at a by-election in 1999. It was one of the constituencies of the Model Parliament of 1295. The inland town once boasted a pier – on a canal. It gave its name to the surrounding area and achieved fame through George Orwell’s book ‘The Road to Wigan Pier’.  WILTSHIRE NORTHThis constituency which lies between the Cotswolds and Swindon promises to be a critical marginal. There are radical alterations to the seat as a result of boundary changes. So although it has in the past returned Conservative candidates there could now be a tough battle between them and the Liberal Democrats. At the last election, the Conservatives polled a majority exceeding 5,000 over the Lib Dems but, on paper at least that could be eroded by the boundary changes. Conservative James Gray is the sitting member for this seat.WILTSHIRE SOUTH WESTThis is a new seat in the south-west involving changes to the existing Westbury seat. All the indications are that the new constituency, including Warminster and Wiltshire’s county town of Trowbridge, will become a relatively safe Conservative haven. Tory Andrew Murrison at present sits for Westbury. Experts have calculated that had the new seat existed at the time of the last general election, the Tories would have triumphed over the Liberal Democrats with a majority of around 8,500. The constituency covers Ethandune, site of a decisive victory by King Alfred the Great against the Danes in 878.  WIMBLEDONThis south-west London constituency has traditionally been Conservative-held, although there have been Labour blips over the years with that party winning in 1945, 1997 and 2001. At the last election, the Tories wrested it back but with a majority of only 2,300, so a tough fight is promised with Labour putting this constituency high on its target list. In 2005 one candidate represented a party called Tiger's Eye, the Party for Kids. He got 50 votes. This affluent constituency is referred to in guide books as "famous for tennis and Wombles". The sitting MP Stephen Hammond, a financier, first entered Parliament in 2005.WINCHESTERThis Hampshire cathedral city, the ancient capital of England, has a largely Conservative background but now the constituency would seem, fairly firmly in the hands of the Liberal Democrats. At the last election, the party secured a majority of nearly 7,500 over the Conservatives. The Lib Dems won the seat in 1997 with a majority of two over the Tories. This was challenged in court and the result declared invalid. At the "repeat" election, the Lib Dems won by a huge 21,000 lead. The seat is remarkable for producing one of the lowest votes for Labour in Britain. The present incumbent, Mark Oaten, is not fighting the seat this time.WINDSORThis constituency, which first sent a Member to Westminster in 1301, is in Conservative hands. At the last election, the Tories secured victory over the Liberal Democrats with a majority of 10,000-plus. Many voters in this constituency work at Heathrow Airport. The sitting MP Adam Afriyie is a businessman who first entered Parliament in 2005. Sir Christopher Wren, the architect who headed the rebuilding of London and its St Paul’s Cathedral after the 1666 fire, once represented this constituency. It includes the Royal castle and Eton. WIRRAL SOUTHThis north-west seat has been in Labour's hands since 1997 when they wrested it from the Conservatives at a by-election just before the general election of that year. Labour's majority in 2005 was 3,724 over the Conservatives, so the seat is well within the grasp of the Tories this time. It is high on their list of target seats. It is a classic suburban seat, with middle-class residential areas. The sitting MP Ben Chapman served as a diplomat in a number of foreign postings before entering Parliament. WIRRAL WESTThis is an affluent, prosperous middle-class area including the towns of Hoylake and West Kirby. It is now marginally in Labour's hands but in the past has been a traditional Tory seat and election experts are suggesting boundary changes might have tipped the balance if they had been in force last time. In 2005, Labour triumphed over the Conservatives with a majority of just over 1,000. The present MP Stephen Hesford, a barrister, is not contesting this election. Selwyn Lloyd, the former Tory Foreign Secretary and later Speaker, represented this seat for some years.WITHAMThis is a new Essex seat. The Boundary Commission made radical alterations to existing constituencies to allow for an extra seat to be created to take account of population shifts. Experts suggest that the Conservatives should win this seat with a majority of some 7,200. The constituency includes Witham town with its London commuters and industrial estates, historic Coggeshall and Tiptree, traditionally a centre of fruit growing and jam making. Tory candidate Priti Patel could, if elected, be the first Asian woman MP. WITNEYThis is a safe Conservative seat in Oxfordshire, currently represented by Opposition Leader David Cameron. At the last election he secured a 14,000 majority over the Liberal Democrats. Mr Cameron entered Parliament in 2001. The constituency is typically made up of market towns and is situated alongside RAF Brize Norton, which is vital to the local economy being one of the largest and busiest RAF bases in the country. High performance Formula One racing cars are produced in this constituency which also covers Blenheim Palace, Woodstock where Sir Winston Churchill was born.WOKINGThis constituency includes the largest town in Surrey - Woking itself - and lies in an affluent stockbroker belt part of the country. At the last general election, the Conservatives registered a 6,600 majority over the Liberal Democrats. There are no boundary changes involved here at this election. The sitting MP Humfrey Malins is a solicitor who has served as a district judge and a crown recorder. He is not fighting this election.WOKINGHAMThis is a reasonably safe Tory seat in Berkshire, west of London, bordered by Oxfordshire to the north and Hampshire to the south-west. The sitting Member is the high-profile Tory John Redwood. At the last general election, he secured a majority of 7,240 over the Liberal Democrats. Mr Redwood, who once challenged unsuccessfully for the Tory party leadership, has represented this constituency since 1987. He is a former investment analyst and once said that former Labour leader Tony Blair was too right-wing for his tastes.WOLVERHAMPTON NORTH EASTThis typically industrial seat is now seemingly a Labour stronghold in the West Midlands, but surprisingly it elected a Conservative MP in 1987 – just for one Parliament and the constituency then returned to its Labour traditions. At the last election, Labour registered an 8,156 majority over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Ken Purchase, who has represented the seat since 1992, is not standing at this election.WOLVERHAMPTON SOUTH-EASTThis is a safe Labour seat in the in the Black Country industrial belt around Bilston, and has been in the party's hands since it was established in 1974. At the last general election, Labour secured a majority of 10,495 over the Conservatives. The sitting MP Pat McFadden, who entered Parliament in 2005, is the House of Commons ministerial spokesman for Business Secretary Lord Mandelson's department.WOLVERHAMPTON SOUTH-WESTThis formerly Conservative-held seat has now been in Labour's hands since 1997. But at the last general election, Labour's majority over the Tories was under 3,000 – so it is a seat high on the Conservative list of priorities. The seat covers Wolverhampton town centre, including the university and civic centre. The sitting MP Rob Marris is a solicitor who once worked as a Canadian lumberjack. He has been an MP since 2001. This seat was held for nearly a quarter of a century from 1950 onwards by Enoch Powell.WORCESTERThis seat, which now covers the precise boundaries of the cathedral city of Worcester, was in Conservative hands for many years. It is now held by Labour but is a critical marginal which the Tories will hope to recapture. At the last election, Labour secured a majority of just over 3,000 over the Tories. Boundary changes before the 1997 general election favoured Labour in that it became a virtually urban seat, having discarded much of the rural surrounds. The sitting MP Michael Foster is the only Labour Member ever to have represented Worcester at Westminster. He introduced a Bill designed to ban hunting with dogs. This seat was held by prominent Tory Peter Walker for three decades. Mr, now Lord, Walker's son Robin will be the Conservative candidate at this election.WORCESTERSHIRE MIDMid Worcestershire, a safe Tory seat, is a mixture of countryside and urban areas which stretches from the edge of Kidderminster through the two towns, Droitwich Spa and Evesham, to Broadway on the edge of the Cotswolds. Droitwich and Evesham act as commuter towns for the West Midlands, although both - and especially Droitwich - have expanding light industry. The other major economic activities are farming and horticulture, together with associated food production, and tourism. At the last election, the Tories sailed home with a majority of 13,327 over Labour. The sitting MP Peter Luff, who formerly represented Worcester, used to work as an assistant to Peter Walker and in the private office of Sir Edward Heath.WORCESTERSHIRE WESTWest Worcestershire, which is in Conservative hands, stretches from the Gloucestershire border in the south almost to Shropshire in the north. It takes in Bredon Hill on the eastern side. The major towns are Malvern to the west, Upton-upon-Severn in the centre, and Pershore to the east. The Tories held it at the last election with a majority of under 2,500 over the Liberal Democrats, so a tough fight can be expected. The Lib Dems will be putting all their big guns into this campaign. The sitting MP, Sir Michael Spicer, chairman of the 1922 Committee of Tory back-benchers, is not standing this time.WORKINGTONThis Labour-held constituency covers much of north-west Cumbria. As well as Workington itself, the constituency contains the towns of Cockermouth, Keswick, Maryport and Aspatria. It is a working-class ex-mining constituency. Although it has been a Labour seat for many years, Workington fell into Tory hands between 1976 and 1979 when it reverted to Labour again. At the last election Labour secured a majority of just short of 8,000 over the Conservatives. The current MP Tony Cunningham is a former teacher.WORSLEY AND ECCLES SOUTHThis is a new constituency in Greater Manchester which is expected to become a safe Labour haven. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the last general election, Labour would have sailed home with a majority of 10,000 over the Conservatives. It is compiled from the predecessor seats of Worsley and Eccles. Worsley’s Labour MP is Barbara Keeley, a former systems engineer.WORTHING EAST AND SHOREHAMThis is a relatively safe Conservative seaside constituency. The Tories retained it at the last election with a majority exceeding 8,000 over Labour. The sitting MP Tim Loughton, an expert in Mesopotamian archaeology, has worked as a fund manager in the City of London. The Labour candidate is Emily Benn, grand-daughter of Tony Benn. Miss Benn was selected as candidate for this seat in 2007 when she was only 17. This will make her the youngest ever Labour Party candidate and if she wins she will almost certainly be the youngest MP since the Reform Act of 1832.WORTHING WESTThis is safe Conservative seaside constituency. At the last general election, the Tories sailed home with a majority of 9,379 over the Liberal Democrats. This is regarded as a "white-collar" area in which 30% of the residents are old age pensioners. The current MP is Tory veteran and ex-minister Peter Bottomley, who has represented this seat since it was created in its present form in 1997. Before that he sat for Eltham in south-east London from 1975.THE WREKINThe Wrekin, now a critical marginal constituency, is a horseshoe-shaped seat in east Shropshire and wraps around the new town of Telford, encompassing much of the rural parts of the Telford and Wrekin Borough. Within the constituency are the towns of Wellington, Newport and Shifnal. It is largely rural and agricultural and is the home of several key military establishments. The Tories captured this seat from Labour in 2005, but with a majority of only 942, so a bitter contest can be expected. The sitting MP Mark Pritchard is a former director of a marketing communications company. He has introduced three Bills on animal welfare.WREXHAMThis is a safe Labour seat in this former mining town in north-east Wales. At the last general election the party retained the seat with a majority of nearly 7.7,000 over the Liberal Democrats, with the Tories hot on the Lib Dem heels for second place. The sitting MP lawyer Ian Lucas represented Trevor Rees-Jones, who was Princess Diana's bodyguard and a survivor of the crash which killed her, in a legal battle with Mohamed al-Fayed. Mr Lucas has been an MP since 2001.WYCOMBEThis is a relatively safe Conservative seat which has been returning MPs to Westminster since 1295. At the last general election, the Conservatives triumphed with a majority of just over 7,000 over Labour. The main town in the constituency, High Wycombe, contains many working and middle class voters and a sizeable ethnic minority that totals around one quarter of the population. The surrounding villages which account for just under half of the electorate are some of the most wealthy areas in the country with extremely low unemployment and high incomes. The sitting MP Paul Goodman, a former novice monk and ex-leader writer on The Daily Telegraph, is not contesting this election. He says MPs have lost power.WYRE AND PRESTON NORTHThis is a new seat in the north-west which shows all the signs of becoming a safe Conservative haven. Experts have calculated that had this constituency existed at the time of the last general election, the Tories would have triumphed with a majority exceeding 12,000 over Labour. It is the 16th seat in the county of Lancashire and is formed from parts of the Preston and Lancaster and Wyre constituencies. The present MP for Lancaster and Wyre is Ben Wallace, a defence expert, former officer in the Scots Guards and an ex-Member of the Scottish Parliament. In 2008 he was named Campaigner of the Year in the Spectator/Threadneedle Parliamentary awards for his work in promoting transparency of MPs' expenses.WYRE FORESTThis constituency went from Conservative to Labour and then to Independent within the space of two general elections. After Labour captured the seat from the Tories in 1997, there was considerable local anger at the downgrading of Kidderminster Hospital. The Health Concern candidate, Richard Taylor, a former consultant physician at the hospital, fighting on this single issue, stormed home with a majority of 17,630 in 2001. He won again in 2005, but with a vastly reduced majority of 5,250. The seat comprises Kidderminster, Bewdley – once the political base of pre-war Tory Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin - and rural woodland. It includes the terminus of the Severn Valley steam railway, one of the country’s longest preserved lines. WYTHENSHAWE AND SALE EASTThis is a Labour stronghold, eight miles south of Manchester city centre. At the last general election, Labour stormed home with a majority of nearly 11,000 over the Conservatives. The seat contains the massive post-war built council estate in Wythenshawe - once the biggest in Europe - and the suburban, more middle-class areas of Sale to Wythenshawe's west. The sitting MP Paul Goggins, a former social worker, entered Parliament in 1997. This seat was previously held by Alf, now Lord, Morris, Britain's first Minister for the Disabled.YEOVILThis Somerset constituency now appears to be safely in the hands of the Liberal Democrats. From 1918 until 1983 it was continuously held by Conservative MPs, but since then the Liberals or Liberal Democrats have secured it. At the last general election, the Lib Dems triumphed with a majority exceeding 8,500 over the Conservatives. Yeovil is not only a thriving market town, but also a growing industrial and commercial area with light industry and hi-tech engineering for aerospace production. Westland Helicopters is the largest employer, with a workforce of about 5,000. The sitting MP David Laws, who is on the right-wing of the Lib Dems, is an economist and investment banker. Paddy, now Lord, Ashdown, the former Liberal Democrat leader, held this seat from 1983 until 2001.YNYS MONThis constituency – Ynys Mon is the Welsh name for Anglesey – is a critical marginal between Labour and Plaid Cymru. At the last general election, Labour scraped home with a majority of 1,242 over Plaid, so a tough battle is to be expected again this time. This partly Welsh-speaking constituency also includes the famous ferry port of Holyhead plus the smaller Holy Island. The current MP, Anglesey-born Albert Owen, is a former merchant seaman.YORK CENTRALThis is a new constituency formed from wards in the disappearing York City seat. Experts have calculated that if this constituency had existed at the time of the 2005 general election, Labour would have triumphed with a majority of 10,344 over the Conservatives. Labour’s Hugh Bayley is the current Member for York, a seat which he captured from the Conservatives in 1992. This constituency, with its medieval history, minster and city walls, is also a famous railway centre and contains a university, plus thriving manufacturing and tourist industries. It was birthplace of Guy Fawkes whose bid to blow up Parliament and King was foiled in 1605.YORK OUTERThis is another new seat with a unique doughnut shape, surrounding the York Central constituency. It looks certain to become a critical marginal between the Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives. Experts have calculated that had this seat existed at the time of the last general election, the Liberal Democrats would have prevailed over the Conservatives but with a majority of only about 200. It is bound, therefore, to be a bitterly-fought contest. Only a fraction of it comes from the old city constituency and it extends into rural areas previously under Ryedale and Vale of York.  YORKSHIRE EASTThis safe Conservative seat covers the northern part of the East Riding of Yorkshire unitary authority from Pocklington and Market Weighton through Driffield to Bridlington. It comprises rural inland Wolds, seaside resorts and market towns. At the last election, the Tories secured a majority of nearly 6,300 over Labour. The sitting MP is Greg Knight, a solicitor, who formerly represented Derby North until he lost that seat to Labour in 1997.
 
(1 row)

